Abandoned his inheritance,
Abandon hope for evermore.
A ball here, there a children's evening,
And bow in manner unaffected.
And found the role he best could fill.
And lost all in a final crash.
And not to venture from sight!
And walked him in the Summer Park.
And was a great economist.
And, with a sudden epigram,
A pedant, yet an able lad.
Acquire their wealth, and what they live on
Against each other swiftly beat.
And later in tranquillity
And, donning a broad bolivar,
And comet wine spurts forth and flows,
And Limburg cheese's living mass.
And lo! a leap, and lo! she flies,
And mortgaged, therefore, all his land.
An honoured citizen backstage,
And Strasbourg pie, that keeps for ever,
And there shone copycat Knyazhnin.
And the grand cuckold, without scruple,
And truffles, young men's luxury,
And why they can dispense with gold,
And yawns, exclaiming with dismay:
And, in profound abstraction pacing,
And even Didelot's boring stuff.'
And, with a swish, the curtains soar.
And, with my disabused lorgnette
Appearing sombre and to mope,
Are you the same? Have others taken
At last saw high society.
At looking wise and listening,
A friend of liberty and reason,
About his dress - a pedant or
Across the stage with noisy roars;
Alas, much life I have neglected
Already, though, Onegin's gone
And in my sleep they stir my heart.
And jealous female whisperings
And keep a hold on your lorgnette!
And mind the beauty of one's nails:
A dandy, as we said before.
And still in harness shivering horses
And thirty kinds of brush to clean
And weary footmen still are sleeping
And, stepping out at last from there,
Applause all round. Onegin enters,
Askew, his double eyeglass centres
A man's attire, who, thus arrayed,
An enterprise that's bold, I know it,
And profiled heads are silhouetted
And you, mammas, pay more attention,
Are deafened by the howling strings.
Are still not Russian words today.
At boxes, at the tiers he gazes;
A cherished dream in which I stand
At least three hours he spent preparing
A splendid house is brightly lit,
A train of malice, spite and slander!
Ah, little, little feet! I wonder
And catch her feet in my embraces!
And he, a fiery rake, his leave takes
And scatter caustic words of wit,
And to his stand the cabman's crawling,
And yet how happy was my Eugene -
And, in our years, bon ton, propriety
And even you, young beauties, gracing
And once more given to inaction,
Are charming, friends, I do agree,
A free man in the bloom of years
A lengthy tablecloth or pressed
All were by different shackles fettered;
And mourning taffeta he drew
A malady, whose explanation
Across the bookshelf's dusty crew.
All this will frequently afford
An apostate from stormy pleasure,
And, past times having lost their hold,
And epigrams in sombre style.
And when the cheerful, glass-like waters
A great delight to conversations.
Above a stream. Far off, there stretched
Above the sea, forever roaming,
Alive, at liberty once more,
All lovers of a funeral.
All round was silent, save a sentry
All was quite simple; oaken floorboards,
Alone among his acquisitions,
Alongside verses incomplete.
Already they put him to sleep;
And captures glory's palm to boot;
And hearken to your magic voice!
And in my Africa to sigh
And on his deathbed, looking forward
And very glad to change his lot
And where I left my heart interred.
And yawned, as he prepared ahead
And, gravely, afterwards dispersed
And cleared the darkness from my mind,
And dogged him like a faithful wife
And earn for me the prize of fame:
And eau-de-pomme in jugs and jars
And far niente is my law.
And how the hero will be known;
And in my soul all trace has vanished,
And shamelessly repeats the fable
And, in its thick, entangled bowers
And curling, shoulder-length black hair.
And fame's sweet pain, inebriation
And grace the world with blissful days.
And in a maiden's sweet embrace.
And keep awaiting him each day;
And soon, soon when the storm is done
And stoves with multi-coloured tiles.
Another memory comes, revealing
Appeared to him a novelty;
Are friends of amorous reverie.
Arriving from all sides to call,
A salon damasked floor to ceiling,
As if some business they'd rehearsed.
As if we were no longer able
A tiny foot inside my hand.
A wilful swarming of desires.
A young Armida's lips or seek
As surely as  their little feet.
At seeming always to be curious,
At setting ladies' smiles aflame.
At that time we became companions.
At touching lightly on a thing,
A subject not concerning us.
A vast, neglected garden nursed
An old interior or a new.
And not an ink stain anywhere;
And offered equal cause for comment
And, happy one, without degrading
And charms of grave simplicity.
And stringent neighbourhood debate.
And that their hands would never spare
Another slyly smiled, unworried,
A sage in rural isolation,
As castles should be: solid-based,
A devotee of Kant and rhyme.
And worldly noise and glitter still
As soon as on the carriage way
At first, our Eugene made provisions
At first, they all rode up to greet him;
A freemason, a crack-brained ass;
All daughters were eligible
All prejudices, we consider
All this was novel to Onegin;
And Dunya pours him out a cup,
And feelings, too, by him unshared.
A new landowner, at that moment,
Appeared as an enticing riddle,
Are no more than a tool for us,
At first, since so dissimilar,
A chilling comment, and he thought:
All these were subjects of concern.
All things promoted disputations
And centuries-old prejudices,
And Eugene, gently condescending,
And ever is prepared to babble
And hearing them stirs up our heart.
And in the end could leave it, but
And led them to reflect: they would
And life and destiny in turn -
And we as an absurdity
And who ensured he did not lose
As he recounted their abatement.
A lily of the valley, hidden
About town fashions and events.
A simple soul, not seeking glory,
At once, by hinting, to deplore
A stallion from the Don would meet him
Always and everywhere one vision,
And by degrees the day grows bright.
And childish escapades were foreign
And did not care what secret tome
And longer, too, the lazy East,
And so then she was called Tatiana.
And thoughts about her would enliven
And to her doll with gravity
As artless as the poet's way,
As charming as a lover's kisses,
At any novel at your leisure,
A sign of the desire to govern,
A stranger, an anomaly.
A substitute for lamplight's blur.
Attended to his every word.
Awakened at her usual time,
A tender novel in this manner
A wayward, silent, sad young maiden,
As empty playthings, unengrossing,
As for his wife, she'd also gone
A bond to which she'd not consented;
Acclimatized, became contented.
And, to dispel her dreadful sorrow,
At first, she strained and sobbed and ranted,
A fop and Ensign in the Guards.
All but divorced her husband, too,
And made a song of every word.
And then became a proper wife.
A Lovelace for a Grandison.
A Russian N just like a French one
A substitute for happiness.
A thing of note she soon discovered
Akul'ka' formerly  Selina',
Alas! each generation must
And at their table guests were served
And chuckled over this and that.
And finally appeared becapped
And he received a second crown.
And little bound to it I am;
And one fine day our grandsons will
And say: now that man was a poet!
And someone's heart it will awaken;
And so the guests would drive away.
And there, above his last remains,
And there, in tears, he wrote another
And this new strophe that I nurse
And thus the two of them grew older
And tittle-tattle, who confided
At eventide, sometimes, there gathered
A flattering hope!, when I am famous,
A group of kindly neighbours, who,
Admirer of Aonia's maids,
And saves my volatile creations,
And set upon an oil-cloth board.
A habit, Lensky - all that chatter.'
Above the daft horizon on us.'
All in Onegin coalesced.
All objects seemed without a pause
All sad and silent like Svetlana,
All started furtively to lecture,
All these in her imagination
And all the way sat silently.
And as for Lensky's wedding, they
And by the window sat and stared.'
And cursed their leisurely observance
And every day and night were full
And given neighbours cause for talk.
And Grandison the consummate
And in her heart the thought was live;
And now, alas, her hot, lone slumber,
And simply had to be delayed
And view Tatiana as a bride;
And was requited  Eyes asunder,
And Werther, martyr to his passion,
A letter for her hero lover 
At high speed by the shortest way.
A most significant impression
Alone, Tatiana roams within
And, in the novel's closing action,
And an attractive countenance.
And ancient Russia's rural ways.
And courting a fair mistress, kneeling
And having scorned the threats of Phoebus,
And lead them to the altar then 
And loses the desire to rove.
A demon new will enter me;
And now she's ready to adore
And there has gained pre-eminence.
And uttering an ardent vow
And virtue gained a worthy crown.
And you'll imagine in each place
A moral brings on somnolence,
A novel of the ancient kind
About those years, can you recall
And all beneath the tranquil night
And chanted while to church I crept.
And I was just thirteen, you see.
And now Tatiana's heart was soaring
Another's grief or ecstasy,
Are filled  Night comes, the moon's patrolling
A languid light, illuminating
Above their brows hell's admonition:
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
Alas, Tatiana's fading, waning;
Alas, the virtues you are famed for,
All's quiet. For her the moon has cast
Amidst admirers acquiescent
And, blinded in his naive fashion,
And in a letter undesigned
And in her native tongue she could
And so in French she penned this version 
And with a tender heart's vibration?
And, terror-stricken, thought I read
And, to be frank, from them I fled,
A lady's love up to this day
A simple, Russian family,
A solemn monument proclaims:
A tender soul, intelligence
A tryst to which you're always turning;
As she looked out and watched the moon 
At least, by a more tender word
At least by showing some compassion,
A bonneted scholar at a ball
A captivating, harmful mixture?
A crop of exquisite new creatures
And cannot get my fill of it.
And make us bow to grammar's rule:
A frightful prospect, if applied;
All faint and numb, aflame and fearing,
Alone, not understood and ailing,
And even at this very second,
And falls upon a bench  exclaiming:
And if the master once requested '
And moonlit sky grows dim. A valley
An artless soul's imagining!
At Shrovetide they'd be entertaining
A sudden flame consumes the maiden,
A sudden thought came, overpowering 
A wayward spirit, never still
An incorrect and careless patter,
An inexact delivery
And not to mention me by name '
And say a word to you, and then
And singing by decree a merry,
And slipped through night's transparency,
And something else has been decided 
And tears have filled her languid gaze.
And virtuous mother, if I chose.
And we're  in no way fashionable,
And whispered words of hope to me?
And, meanwhile, still her soul is aching,
And you're my guardian till the grave 
And, with a bow, place in your keeping 
Another!  No, I'd not have given
Aren't you my early little bird!
Are out of fashion nowadays.
As bygone sins of youth, no worse
As she departs in yellow shawl.
As though she'd heard a harsh rebuke.
At first, I did not want to vex you.
A cunning servant girl intent
And as the art of love rewarded.
And beat an iridescent wing,
And catch her in our tempting nets.
And he recalled the mournful manner
And husbands with their friendly stance!
And left them, feeling no connection,
And pale complexion of Tatiana;
And passion's unrestricted play.
And she, as if by fire seared,
And their majestic periwigs.
And thus more surely we undo her
And, in the morning, does not know
And cleave to you when times were bitter,
And coldly jealous. I'm like him.
And day and evening disappears;
And, it may be, more gently still.
And is it this you were awaiting
And plunged into a reverie,
And smile with malice unintended;
And such simplicity were writing?
And to your judgement I shall bow.
And was not tempted to mislead her;
And would be happy  if I could!
A heart that long ago turned heartless;
As have their famed red heels affixed
A household boy served up the cream;
A hunter crouched behind a bush.
All, like an empty echo cease.
Allow me: you perhaps may need a
Allows his pawn to take his rook.
And nature's wayward disposition,
And, following the rules obtaining,
And blushes as he turns the page.
And from this sad one take my leave.
And our sweet sex is light as fluff.
And then, it is to be expected
And what the monde thinks is enough 
A monogram: an O and E.
Another disenchanting him,
Are all your kindred healthy, well?
A person's liberty and rights
A pledge of beauty and the good,
A pure, effusive declaration;
A sweet and sinless fantasy.
A thud of hoofs!  Her blood is shaking.
A yawn with laughter he suppresses:
An edifying novel on
And Lensky with a dreamy look
And signed with toute &#224; vous, Annette;
And, leaning on a table, guess
And not the solemn inquisition
And on the last you will be reading:
An epigram I'd fain resort to,
At Christmas visit or, if not,
At home or homewards, at all stages
A book, sound sleep, a fine excursion,
A bottle of resplendent wine,
A chill, dark dawn presages winter;
A gravestone, Aphrodite's temple,
About those times you keep invoking,
All that concerns her, every mention:
Already stirring in my soul,
And choke him with a tragedy,
And gaze into her eyes - they say
And scare a flock of wild ducks resting:
And to us rhymesters bellow:  Cease
And when the precious compilation
And with each one set us the task
And, lightly clad, would set off till
And, river-like, his elegies
A hermit underneath God's heaven
A neighbour comes in, whom I corner,
A pleasant, languid belle in fashion!
Across this Hellespont he swam,
Against a sudden icy patch.
And dressed 
A dullish season lay in wait;
And to it he by slow degrees
A fancy meal at which to idle,
A fiery steed with trusty bridle,
A fresh, young kiss for his diversion
Appraise my nonsense by its style.
A Southern winter's counterfeit,
Although we won't acknowledge it.
And crackling frost settles already
And plans to swim, but in a trice,
And silvers midst the fields and leas,
And then, alone in residence,
And with a melancholy sough
A friend to every winter's night.
A gallop in the bitter prairie?
A heavy goose steps out with caution,
A maiden in her small hut, singing,
Absorbed in household calculations,
And arguments and cheerful dreams.
And pours in playful, frothy splashes
Armed with a blunted cue, he stations
A simile for - please invent.
A troika of roan horses wheel
A verselet, villainously ribald.
A  I can no longer savour;
A  is like a woman's favour,
Above all at that special time
Among the empty dinner plates.
And all of them send salutations.
And distant hills that were by winter's
And never show a nose. They're slighted.
An evening gloom accumulates 
And, up the chimney, pipe smoke rises.
A voguish rhymester's calvary,
A wolf and hungry she-wolf enter
At once, a Veuve Cliquot or Mo&#235;t,
Awaited Lensky's exaltations.
A certain sign that guests were nearing.
A daredevil kibitka hurries,
A Lafontaine account of rapture 
Across the sombre sky and crumble,
Adored the Russian winter season,
All objects held a secret content,
All this so terrified Tatiana,
Already has a finger frozen.
And, all her senses in commotion,
And in her household these occasions
And in the bathhouse of the manor
An impish household lad who's chosen
And nothing past can be recovered;
And play the part of horse instead,
And Twelfth Night evenings dark and close.
And yet - she found a secret pleasure
And, when her little ring appears,
And I - remembering Svetlana -
A dark, untamed and age-old current,
Are creatures that you cannot measure,
A frosty night; a sky transparent;
A labyrinthine web of wonders,
All's hushed. Sleep overtakes the lass.
And through them runs a seething torrent,
And who appeared beside the river?
Are set above the rushing water -
A mirror on the moon, complaining
A path across a snow-filled glade.
A perilous and tiny bridge
A radiant prospect, undiscovered;
Arranged a s&#233;ance all night through;
As at a vexing separation,
A bear, a blizzard, little bridge,
A burly bear with ruffled fur;
Along a forest path he rushes,
And all cry out:  She's mine! She's mine!
And in the snowfall buried deep.
And noise and shouting blast the ear;
And sad snow covers roof and ground,
And, quickly, opening the door,
And, seeping through the topmost summits
And curious to find out more
And hellish spectres; savage cries
And she's exposed to the misshapen
And suddenly the pack was gone;
And suddenly through trees and bushes
And swiftly to the door he flies.
And Tanya no more fears disaster,
And, bending downward, rests his head
And finally managed to persuade her
And lighter than a swallow, saying:
And there a crouching windmill dances,
And to her sister nothing said.
Are covered by the blizzard's sweep
A few odd volumes of Malvina;
As if there's some big funeral;
A hut appears; all's wild around
Another with a cockerel's head,
Apparently half-crane, half-cat?
Around a table monsters sit,
A piercing cry, the hut is shaking,
A skeleton, august and formal,
A skull is perched with scarlet cap,
A small-tailed dwarf, and what is that,
A song is sung of bygone years:
A starry choir from heaven flows
A sudden gust of wind blows, lashing
A terrified Tatiana hastens
Astride a spider sits a crab,
A window sheds illumination
A witch with bearded goat cross-bred,
At once towards the girl incline
A book containing vulgar tales,
A company commander came,
All cross themselves as seats are found.
All go to table, arm in arm,
And bribe-taker who loved to eat.
And clinking wine-glasses ring out.
And councillor-in-retirement, Flyanov,
And district mothers, all aflame.
And in the place of belle Nina
And now from an adjacent quarter
And Petushkov, our fop, came, too;
And so on. Tanya's reservations
And volume three of Marmontel.
And yet her nightmare does foretell
A Martin Zadek won't dispel,
A merry nameday festival.
Arranged in alphabetic order,
A sudden light, and in alarm
A wondrous dream she has: she's taken
A wood's before them; pines are slumbering
A worthwhile object: surely who
A youthful maid will always hasten
As through a frozen pane the light
A multitude of sad occasions.
A noted wit, late from Tambov, clad
About to cry, poor thing, she's ready
Accepts his stanza gracefully.
Alas, it lies beyond my vision,
Alas, too salty for the throttle.
And from the table has not stirred.
And starts his song, off-key. He's f&#234;ted
Are still. Unable to ignore him,
Aurora-like but rosier,
Avenge himself on every hand.
A look miraculously tender.
All sons of avid tedium!
Along whose narrow tracks so neat
And, by the way, I like to talk
And all have spilled into the hall,
And by the long mazurka vexed,
And in a whisper, bends, confiding
And in full glory shines the ball.
And they rejoin the waltz, unheeding;
And this Fifth Chapter I shall cleanse
A giant ballroom shook and pounded,
A madrigal, the merest slush,
Already versed in artful play,
Approaches Olga. Rapidly,
A scandalmonger, seasoned cheat,
A seasoned maid, not married off,
As much of dishes, feasts and cork,
A brace of pistols, bullets two -
A challenge or cartel he'd penned;
All's calm: from the salon ascended
And Flyanov somewhat over-sated
And gazed upon the darkened field.
And once, engaged in actual battle,
And on the floor Monsieur Triquet
And sad, Tatiana shone,
A jealous anguish makes her start,
All evening Lensky was abstracted,
A man of educated station,
Another character arrives.
As if a chasm, black and frightful,
As if a cold hand pressed her heart,
A modern Regulus, honour's god,
Alone, encountering his soul,
Already, burdened by his wrongs,
Assigned their place from entrance-hall
A steadfast friend, a squire grown tamer,
A sudden ceasing of the chatter;
A surge of passion suffocates her;
Alternatively reconcile them,
Although some tricks he perpetrated
And set them duelling for their life,
And, eyes a-twinkle with the fun,
And agitated when they met;
And, later, secretly revile them
And breeding ducks and geese, is free
And by some ruse avert his breast
And duck the pistol by retreating.
And my Zaretsky, as I said,
And read the note the poet sent.
And sometimes, like a simple chap,
And so was not surprised to greet him
And there it is - public opinion!
Arrange a breakfast for the three,
As you did, Homer, bard divine
At times judiciously keep mum
Awaits the answer fretfully;
A rendezvous before the duel,
A temple or a thigh to claim.
As giddy hope, towards him flying,
A lily's stalklet to enfold,
All this, friends, signified: I shall
And finally, as night was ending,
And hands him linen with panache.
And have the horses moved to where
And, maid of beauty, in your sorrow,
And follow rules of ancient days
And so he wrote obscurely, limply
And sparkling day dispels the gloom,
A person by the Muse protected,
A predetermined hour will tell
Arriving home, he first inspected
Awaken him with a commandment:
A passing snowstorm overhead
At last he wakes, prepares to rise,
A contract with the  honest guy'.
A string of chords, no more assaying,
Although he's not a well-known figure,
And thoughts? But now with grim impatience,
Any old how was quite unsound,
Are bogus shame and lack of pride.
As if the two had never met,
As in a feud of generations
A greyish powder was decanted
Advanced four steps, not aiming yet,
All it contains is dark and still,
And at his pallid brow take aim
And likewise Lensky calculated,
And love and hate, and aspiration
A dunderheaded clown and foe,
And then, advancing still, Onegin
And turn from it in shame and horror;
A home forever silent, chill,
Amid the bloom of hope, desire
And died according to convention
And earlier sadness still I rue.
And female reapers come to sink
And halts her steed, before it pausing,
And, at a trot, she rides through meadows,
And I - I with a sigh confess -
And scarcely out of child's attire,
And village quacks stood by his side.
And where's her sister now? Where, too,
And wonders:  How did Olga suffer?
And you, most cherished ruminations,
And, parting from the Muses, married;
And is the garland of my youth
Are lost of an uplifting voice,
Audacious, tender, highly wrought?
A happy squire, with cuckold's crown,
A languid peace showed on his brow.
As children thronged and women cried
A herdsman to the tomb retreating
A leftward path from the location
At forty he'd have had the gout,
A mound of snow, already teetering,
A simple monument is laid.
A tear to dim her tender eyes
As, tightening the leather leads,
At Lensky's premature demise.
A full account of everything,
Above a river without name,
Aged such and such, in such a year.
Alas, her sister, whom she missed,
Alas, poor Lensky! In the kingdom
All that exults and radiates
Alone, beside it, grey and feeble,
Already to my thirtieth year?
And, by this lancer overpowered,
And dreamings of a pensive soul.
And finally be turned to stone
And from my old life take a rest.
And there is heard the source's sound -
And, on the grave, in moonlight glow,
And you, my youthful inspiration.
Are resurrected by the spring,
A grief that went not very deep.
A lancer wooed with practised charm,
Across the river, smoking, glow
Alone, alone now is Tatiana!
Already at the altar she
And, after fighting off each hound,
And, as her fiery eyes she dips,
And, bustling, said goodbye and hovered,
And after them, outside the manor,
And, hearing her alarming cry,
And, like a shade, she wanders, goalless,
And in her cruel isolation
And torn asunder is her breast.
And to the empty courtyard goes.
Another captured her attention,
Another's flattering intervention
Awaits us all beyond the grave.
A bearded outrider is seated
A garden by a limpid river.
Anisya promptly came to meet her,
A manor house, a village, trees,
A noisy crowd of serf boys fly
A smile alights upon her lips.
A wondrous night, a moon sublime 
A young townswoman who is spending
A youthful lover, dreamer, poet
As smoke across an azure heaven,
A cue lay on the billiard baize,
Above the mist-enveloped river;
All seem to her like priceless treasures,
All set her languid soul astir
And give his bones a peaceful berth
And read a book the morning through 
And that pale half-light over all,
And the old master lived here, too.
And, on a little column standing,
And it is time, indeed high time
And read the books there on her own.
And Tanya, hiding her excitement,
And wept a long time, copiously.
And, in the study's silent setting,
And found a different world indeed.
Appeared bizarre. With apprehension
Arms crossed, a cast-iron statuette
At first, she lacked the appetite,
A chain of inns on every route.
A riding crop upon a chaise
Although, as we're aware, Onegin
And fairly faithfully depicted:
And gradually my Tatiana
And in the margins she encountered
And modern man put on parade
And two, three novels of the hour,
A paltry phantom or a joke,
As if she were deciphering spells.
A Muscovite in Harold's cloak,
About her.'Well then, what's the matter?'
And bless the ditches and the moats
And cast-iron bridges will support us
And Christendom will institute
And eighteen nags invade the yard.
And feather beds and mattresses,
And golden autumn is arriving.
And he found Tanya such a marvel,
And in the log hut, losing patience
A drive is light and pleasant. Like
And meagre menu to excite
And mileposts, like a fence, race by,
And no less dated turns of phrase,
And Petushkov - she left the room then.
And Tanya learns of her intention.
And tears stream out of Tanya's eyes.
And wanders lonely in the woods.'
A guest, hussar Pykhtin, was here,
Arising as the sun is dawning,
A parody, when said and done?
An unrewarded appetite;
And our young maid enjoyed completely
And troikas tireless and intrepid,
And with a Russian hammer treat
A fiery welcome she prepared
Across the pits the carriage flashes,
Affection of the invalid,
And exclamations pour apace.
An hour or two they go on driving
And with a stocking in his hand.
Arrested by their special charm.
A slender European carriage,
A voguish song devoid of reason,
As with old friends Tatiana hastens
At stations fleas and bedbugs preying
Away now to the turnpike pillars
A certain general of substance
A grey-haired Kalmyk stands inside,
Ah Tanya, come to me, my dear 
Alina!'  Who'd have thought? It's been
And grandmothers in chorus cry:
And incoherent rot holds sway;
And in their singsong tones impart
And kiss her, gently squeezing hands,
And managed to engage her soul,
And near him, an old man, who'd seen her,
And since I held you - all those years!'
And since I pulled you by the ears!'
And since with gingerbread I plied you!'
And speak of her with denigration
And then, to nature's way submitting,
And yet she is unhappy, parted
And, leaning on a doorpost, he
And, understanding nothing, she
And, weeping, by exhaustion hit,
Are welcomed with solicitation,
A languid mind won't smile or dance,
A little pale, a little thin,
Across the crags of Caucasus!
Arouses her, and in the shadows
Arrayed in torn kaftan and glasses,
At some dull aunt's, sat by the girl
A stable, fence and kitchen range.
After this maiden he admired.
All strike the senses suddenly.
Amid the wastes of sad Moldavia
Among the men she'd be the centre,
And blessed before he joined the dust 
And change my course entreating patience,
And each one whispers in her ear:
And Moscow pretty women, too,
And nonchalantly held lorgnettes.
And those tenebrous linden ways
And, with her gaudy mantle fluttering,
And, with your trusty staff, let me
And by the way two words, updating:
And disregarded Cicero,
And fled afar  she followed me.
And gambol like a young bacchante,
And, for the first time now, I'm taking
And in a youthful gathering
And in that amicable crowd,
And I, who make the rule of passions
An Introduction's here, though late.
And to these crazy feasts she brought
And with a smile my Muse was greeted;
And, over cups, to guests she'd sing,
And hymn of praise to heaven's sire.
And in her hands a small, French book.
And in my garden she appeared
And past imperious dames she flits.
And ranks and years that mixed at ease.
And then a change in her behaviour:
As a provincial miss, revealing
A cosmopolitan, a patriot,
And any purpose in his life.
And men of wit constrain your space?
And money, too, by being thrifty;
And only mediocrity
And then at thirty married well;
And what if youth in turn is driven
A fashion that is past and done
A Harold, Quaker, Pharisee
A melancholy, crazed impostor
A restless spirit took him over,
Across the room, while gravely raising
And hardly suits our etiquette;
A thoughtful sadness in her look
Although Onegin looked most closely,
An inclination like a fever
And sallied forth without direction,
And, as with all he'd left behind,
And dimly sees, reflected in it,
And pensively he drives back home,
An epigram might serve it better 
And preached to in a t&#234;te-&#224;-t&#234;te
And seems a faithful illustration
And so he came to the conclusion
And to success makes no pretence;
And was it from their parts perchance;
Appeared to him and would not fade,
A wish to travel, anywhere
As leaves, in putrid autumn, fade.
A youthful feast, a merry fare
As was the case in years departed,
As what will he appear now? Melmoth?
At a soir&#233;e.  My God, to her!
At him  and whatsoever shakes
A dream, now sad, now full of charm,
And, in its free vivacity,
And fixedly he looks, while she
And fools - a necessary class;
And joins Onegin in recapturing
And with the large-grained salt of banter
Are flashing without affectation.
A fixed idea he keeps on mulling.
A jackanapes, a bird of passage,
About some government affair;
All, all I've wanted to express,
All send him to the doctors, they
Already suffering from consumption?
And every day and night imagines,
An irritable gentleman,
An old man in the old way joking:
And life, empowered, sends up shoots
And strip the trees from root to bough.
A missive could not be deferred.
Around the hostess, light remarks
A smile among the guests, seduced
Although in this I share his views
And better looking, to my mind,
And hold a placid conversation 
And I foresee your proud expression
And I had no desire to forfeit
And I'm deprived of that: for you
And I surrender to my fate.
And then, from all a heart finds tender
And they are burdensome enough.
And, possibly the apprehension
And by degrees his thought and feeling
And crowding deep inside his soul.
And dropped into the fire, unseen,
And everything Onegin knows 
And he did not become a poet,
And hears a voice:  Well then, he's dead!'
And looked at Eugene unperturbed
And nearly drove him off his head
And seized him by the collar, then
And then a country house - where she
And, looking at him fixedly,
And how you lectured me, so meek.
And in your heart, what did I find?
And treating me with animus,
And you were right regarding me,
Anger alone has marked this face 
Are drumming sermons into us,
At a reception he attends,
A second and a third he sends,
A tender spark, I was affected,
As if asleep at some encampment,
A flood of tears she softly sheds
A group of former friends turned rotten,
A little maiden's modest love.
A long time passes by, quiescent,
Admit that in our backwoods haven,
All lots were equal anyhow 
All this, with which you made me cower,
And for the humble churchyard near us,
And happiness so near  But no,
And I, poor Tanya, listless, ceded,
And my young age. But now, I see
And there resides in it true pride
And win you, in society,
And yet that time was so auspicious
And you at least respected me
And, reader, now, in this mischance,
Appearance, his extinguished look,
As if by thunder struck. In what
At last she softly speaks again:
A slipper or a magazine.
At once this masquerade, this splendour,
A friend or foe, I wish to part
Among these careless lines, reflections -
And she, from whom the model's taken
And you, my true ideal - now gone,
A soul. A door he opens  what
A word in place. Embarrassed, sullen,
A youth on his nocturnal bed
As Sadi once said in a note.
At twenty was a blade or swell
A sudden tempest of sensation
A swarm of youthful, female traitors,
At whom no jealous ladies aim
Balconies, gates where lions curl,
Bard of The Feasts and languid sorrow,
Barely recalled their love and spite.
Barks, laughter, whistles, song, applause,
Base cowards and calumniators,
Be carried from incarceration
Beating their palms together, tire,
Beat servant girls who got her cross -
Beauties no longer claimed his passion,
Became their native one ere long?
Before her Eugene stood, eyes blazing,
Before me is Tatiana's letter;
Before Onegin an insistent
Before the window, breathing on
Begging, demanding declarations,
Beginning with her cradle days,
Begins to shrill good God! and call:
Behold in soul-filled flight before us
Behold my Eugene's liberation:
Behold our hero at the doorway;
Belated repetitions, urges -
Be charmed by a familial picture,
Bear in pursuit, Tatiana dashes
Because a rash and fiery spirit,
Because grave men delight in trivia,
Because I'm wealthy and renowned,
Because my husband's wounds in battle
Because we never tire of judging
Because we're wont to talk forever
Before a fire of little heat,
Before a secret, inner court
Before her lies a yard that's strange,
Before her shining look they vanished,
Before her soft simplicity,
Before her soul's vivacity!
Before him, faces come and go
Before the fire a table's laid,
Before their hands have turned blood red,
Before you know it: love's a joke
Begins to understand - thank God! -
Beheld at morn the whitened court,
Behind the seemly crowd to go,
Believe me: you'd have never known
Believing in the world's perfection;
Belonging to her lord - a ruse
Below her, from her hill, she sees
Bending her languid little head;
Beneath a backwoods porch the maiden,
Beneath his breast the blood flowed, steaming,
Beneath his daughter's pillow dozing.
Beneath the bridal crown, head lowered,
Beneath the Finnish sky escaping,
Beneath the names already signed,
Beneath the sky of Schiller, Goethe,
Beneath this stone reposeth here.
Beneath which tiny currents wind
Bereft now of its stormy morrow! 
Beside a column,  twixt two aunts,
Beside an 1808 annual:
Beside his heavy wife extended.
Beside the sea on granite walls.
Beside two ancient pines umbrageous.
Betoken friendship's loyal sign.
Betokening seductive nights.
Betrayal a deliverance.
Betrayals no more entertained him,
Betrays my stomach, and instead
Between a golden ananas
Between domestic work and leisure
Between the meat and blanc-manger
Between the wolf and dog' though why it
Bewildered as the house draws close 
Bewildered by a tender shame,
Be known as vulgar I can not 
Before him the Princess alone
Between the lines before him, printed,
Beyond the gate. After two days -
Bichat and Herder and Tissot.
Bidding the monde again adieu;
Blessings to heaven for their lot.
Blest are the cares that day contrives,
Blest comrades of humanity;
Blest he who's given to believing,
Blest is the darkness that arrives!
Blest who betimes has left life's revel,
Blest who in youth was truly youthful,
Blest who matured in proper time,
Blest, too  though, maybe, while he reads,
Blighting the morning of our days.
Bloody roast beef is there to savour,
Blossomed beneath her parents' gaze,
Blowing its trumpet far and wide,
Blowing of noses, hissing, clapping;
Blue chimney smoke ascends the sky,
Bold king of the satiric scene,
Bold song and horn from distant shores
Born to the softness of the orient,
Borne to our youth by reverie.
Boston and ancient omber call
Both with their elbows nudge Tatiana,
Boulevards and Cossack messengers,
Bows, bustle  meanwhile from the dance
Bows to the men on every side
Breaks off. Alone, the angry chorus
Briefly the earth entire forgetting,
Brigade of creditors appeared,
Bringing the meadows' tribute home.
Broke off the chat that they'd begun
Bronzes and china on a stand,
Brothers! I must entreat your patience:
Brothers, there's nothing that can equal
Brought all her little playmates down
Bundle us out with equal zeal!
But Adam Smith instead he relished,
But all at once without discussion
But all this soon came to a close:
But anecdotes he did remember
But, oh my God, what desolation
But as each rule has its exceptions
But Br&#233;guet tells the pleasure seekers
But for the moment I'll ignore it,
But he, instead of this reception,
But my Onegin? Home to bed he
But now the North's unsafe for me.
But pantalons, frac and gilet
But somehow what enchant me more are
But to continue with our story:
But when young Eugene reached the morrow
But where he showed true erudition,
But why should I think it my duty
But you, blest husbands, you remained
But, turning morning into nighttime,
But at the back porch every day
But distant hopes appear and sometimes
But don't refuse, please understand.'
But Eugene's thrifty neighbour, flurried,
But even in those years Tatiana
But ever brighter, brighter grow 
But flaming youth is quite unable
But for the moment let him thrive,
But friendship even of this order
But happiness I never aimed for,
But heartily her husband loved her,
But he, whatever else he'd done,
But he'd no wish to undermine
But in a land of mournful stone,
But I've no wish to change them yet;
But I was born for peaceful pleasures,
But I, in love, was stupid, mute.
But in the past Princess Alina,
But I  what matters this to me,
But if you've even slightly pitied
But in her breast there's still the yearning,
But Lensky, not, of course, intending
But let that be! My fate is sealed,
But look, my pretty one, you're ready!
But look, the light is vanishing.
But my Tatiana does not care.
But nowadays all minds are clouded,
But now it bores me beyond measure.
But now my mind's grown dark and woolly:
But now the door has opened quietly,
But now the radiance of the calm
But now we only see in her
But now, you're off; I'm sorry. Say,
But our time, too, is coming, coming,
But quietly talks to nurse instead:
But simply, friends, to you relate
But soon her lifeless eyes she lowers
But still, it seems, I should delight
But stop. It's time now I translated
But surely you don't love the younger?'
But thank the Lord, you're well and steady!
But they were all unanimous:
But this grand game, once so paraded
But to detail the consequences
But way back I was very smart,
But welcome you without pretension.
But what did I, amazed, discover?
But  learn to govern your confessions;
But all they want's a madrigal!
But being Russian to the core,
But blest is he with modest passion,
But dinner being served brings calm,
But elegies don't have a moral,
But, on receiving Tanya's letter,
But goodness knows what sort of rabble
But hush! I hear an awesome critic
But I'll restrain myself before
But I'm a fool  for as I speak,
But I've no wish to praise you; I
But love and cosset with respect,
But now its noisy effervescence
But Olga, ah, what transformations!
But Olga would not read an ode.
But our two friends are talking here:
But pictures with this kind of feature
But sad is he who lacks illusion,
But summer in our North is merely
But that will do. I much prefer
But where's Onegin? By the way,
But, in the meantime, I'm not trying
But at that moment all were taking
But does it matter? They'll believe
But Eugene pulls the door wide open
But hark!  a crunch of snow  the maiden
But, by an empty dream's deflection,
But all the titles within sight
But by one thought he's overtaken,
But can't discern her fields, her meadows,
But first she asks whether she mightn't
But grandmas, grandpas cannot quicken
But he was wrong: Eugene unheeding
But in small towns and country wards
But it has ended. Supper's ready.
But it was late, his heart was aching,
But lo, her crimson hand extending,
But man of honour, with a mind.
But neither Virgil nor Racine,
But not a bit of it: on spying
But noticing the languid maid's
But now, as in a house forsaken,
But now, benign and simple, he
But no one had as yet discovered,
But not today. Although my feeling
But now, no longer at his place,
But oh, my light youth, if we're parting,
But onward, onward with my story!
But scarcely lost in sleep's enchantment,
But she, alas, was slow of wit.
But she, not noticing her sister,
But soon a drift began to quiver
But soon the guests by small gradations
But sudden fear assailed Tatiana 
But Tanya simply could not cry,
But tea is brought; the dainty maidens
But then again the poet's portion
But there is no escaping him.
But what a dull consortium,
But what the world cannot abide
But when they're ready to depart,
But will and reason bring restraint;
But you look pale again, not better.'
But you're not listening now, I fear.'
But you seem worse.'  The same old thing.
But you, O miscellaneous volumes
But you must know him well enough;
But, reader, we shall never know it;
But I feel helpless, I confess.
But in the drawing-room such trivial
But it is late. A cold wind's risen.
But Larina drove none too fleetly,
But meet my daughter here, Tatiana.'
But nothing changes in their bearing,
But no, once more the deal's undone.'
But now our roadways are decaying,
But passable for kith and kin;
But short-lived summer's taking flight.
But surfaced roads on every hand
But Tanya finds her antics galling.
But Tanya, just as if she sleeps,
But, brighter far than all her sisters,
But all the time his mind's a-whirr.
But at a late age, dry and fruitless,
But even while his eyes were reading,
But for the virginal and young
But he is stubborn, won't surrender,
But I am someone else's wife,
But let's extend congratulations
But she - my lyre dares not disquiet her
But stop, enough, I beg of you,
But there's one coxcomb in dejection
But they are close now, and their horses
But where Melpomene is uttering
But while her mind is in the distance,
But you are weary from your travels;
But, with a sudden burst of flame,
But I seceded from their union
But let me turn now to our matter.
But let that be: I'm in no state
But lets it go, as I do my
But look at how the crowd is clearing,
But neither one fares any better.
But of those friends who, meeting, listened
But own, I can't translate it yet,
But silent glances in the end
But so as to prolong my stay,
But ten strikes, he's already mounting
But then a clink of spurs resounded,
But the princess, so very different,
But to the challenge dared not rise,
But where, time was, I might discover
But who in this august collection
But who is she?'  My wife, dear friend.'
But with his heart held in a fetter,
Buyanov courted her - no fear.
Buyanov whirls off Pustyakova,
By a deserted lake I ponder
By Aeolus wafted hither thither;
By ancient limes, by rivulet;
By candlelight from bed she'd climb.
By chance his verse can still be read now,
By children and a faithful wife,
By children's games was not beguiled
By chill corruption not yet blighted,
By Eugene's speech, but I grew used
By Eugene's unexpected call,
By falling from his Kalmuck steed
By fate united to this stranger:
By Fortune's smile intoxicated,
By girlish pupils, still afraid.
By hearing all the same objections,
By her the poet first was given
By his fastidious poise and carriage,
By kinsfolk, then, is meant ideally:
By lethargy are overcome,
By life we both had been oppressed;
By lofty Zeus's will the heir
By music's thunder animated,
By name Vladimir Lensky, wholly
By Olga's smile invigorated,
By one thing for a while enchanted,
By post congratulate the lot,
By private horse or postal chaise,
By Providence's dispensation
By sleigh, past the Neva he flies.
By some foul liar in a garret
By the Neva, where maybe you
By turns, Tatiana's moaning, sighing,
By turns attentive and dismissive!
By undermining predilections,
By way of a green meadow plying,
Calls for a horse, and, full of gall,
Call for Mo&#235;na in a word,
Can bring him back. The youthful bard
Can it be possible?' thinks Eugene
Can it be she? But no  and yet 
Can she have found the fitting  word'?
Can she have solved Onegin's puzzle?
Can't be brought back and that I'm near
Can you be paltry feeling's slave?
Capricious ladies of society!
Carafes each morning chez V&#233;ry.
Carefree, I'd sing of my ideal,
Cares not a bit such is their sex.
Caricatures of every guest.
Carried away a holy secret,
Carrying tea upon a tray.
Cast boredom, languor in like measure
Cast by the poet's destiny;
Cast eyes on Tanya priggishly
Casting my mind into the distance,
Catch at his coat tails suddenly
Caught by a schoolboy, frolicking;
Causing with feigned despair alarm,
Cerused still is Lukerya Lvovna,
Champion of rights and liberty,
Charmed us  but what is more delighting
Chased by the vernal beams, already
Chasing his love, and, in a bound,
Cheerful he was - about to marry.
Cherries bright and raspberries,
Chieftain of rakes, a pub declaimer,
Childe Harold to a T, Onegin
Clearly he saw he could not keep
Clenching her teeth, remaining steady,
Climbs on his sleigh and clears a spot;
Closed his left eye, as he took aim -
Closer! Into the yard they race.
Clothed even hopeless egotism
Cognizance of a pie in sight
Collapsing at her feet with love.
Collecting books, he stacked a shelfful,
Collective song aimed to prevent
Combs, little files of steel, and scissors,
Come, heartfelt friend, come, longed-for friend,
Come, you maidens beauteous,
Companion of my youthful days,
Companion of so many seasons,
Compare with nature's animation
Compassion, righteous indignation,
Conceited, haughty and indifferent
Concern for guests and their provision,
Concluding vale to a letter;
Confirmed he was by all condemned.
Confronted Eugene all alone.
Confronts a frigid audience,
Conjecture followed on conjecture,
Conquests, their own and those of others,
Consider its caprices, surges,
Constrained her youthful breast; her soul
Consulted not another text.
Consumed with pain and lassitude,
Consumes and drinks enough for two.
Contented with his lot, at once
Contented with their festive labours,
Content with vengeance satisfied,
Continue to disturb my heart.
Continued to inflict distress
Continues to repose in languor,
Conveys it with solemnity.
Coquettes are cool in their decisions.
Coquettish rhyme the years are spurning;
Could be more lovable than you?
Could drink a bottle of champagne,
Could it be love, that youthful pain?
Could it be she who, now so bold,
Could it be she, the same Tatiana,
Could judge his gifts and quality,
Could make his love return again,
Could not conceive how solemn Grimm
Could not eclipse her fellow guest,
Could simply not be separated.
Could take the place of happiness.
Could turn out something elevated,
Could weather, yearly, life's bleak clime,
Could well forgo the vanities
Could you devise for me a way
Creative dreams are more alive.
Creature of heaven or of hell,
Cries out Dame Larina, and fast
Crockery, plates and covers clatter
Crosses where flocks of jackdaws swirl.
Cross with the tea - too sweet a liquid -
Crunches the snow in hurried flight.
Crushed by the utterance, walks off, quaking,
Cry:  Drop your wreath of elegies,
Currants red we'll also throw,
Cursing his crazy self-deception;
Custom no longer favours Latin:
Custom's a despot and prevails.
Cutting the ice, reverberates;
Dance the mazurka, treading light
Dared clean his nails in front of him,
Dark, fir, a forest, hedgehog, witch
Dark flow of fragrant tea already
Daybreak, from valleys large and small,
Daydreams will court your every pace,
Days filled with indolence and ardours
Dead ashes cannot be replenished,
Dear companions, near to us,
Dear fellow, Olga's in her prime,
Dear friends, do you remember that?
Deceit or falsehood and for craving
Delicate patterns on the windows,
Delight in grove or hill or pasture;
Depart then, newborn work this hour,
Departs when lively youth has fled.
Departure has been long extended,
Depicting in his fiery lay
Descends with sunny sparkles glittering.
Designed for comfort, unaffected,
Desires, dreams, sorrows kept invading
Destined the children's wedding day.
Detesting a coquette so cruel,
Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
Did I not spend my happiest days
Did not remain uncastigated,
Did they not try, with much travail,
Did you devote its melodies?
Dig daring tunnels under waters,
Directed at her every minute
Disburdened of the world's opinions,
Discernible in moonlight beams.
Discerns my physiognomy
Discloses Olga, then Vladimir;
Discover life's felicities,
Discrepancies - and there are many,
Discuss the pacts of vanished nations,
Dishevelled. She proceeded.
Displayed such health and levity?
Disputing in indecent haste.
Disquiet, he, with lowered gaze,
Disreputable journal flitting,
Distresses her and makes her wonder,
Disturb my soul, disturb my blood!
Disturb the sleep my soul enjoys.
Diverting the lethargic eye.
Don fetters to defend his honour,
Dozed in the moon's inspiring light.
Do not be cross with me, my soul,
Do not reflect Diana's light;
Don't think.  who knows?  perhaps suspicion 
Down lilac bushes as she hurries;
Do not come and eavesdrop on
Do not come and spy upon
Does all that gladdens, animates,
Does not appeal to you at all,
Does not withdraw her hand unfeeling
Dogs, barking, hurtle out toward her
Downhill, scarce breathing, round her glancing,
Down the surrounding hills the snow
Dressed like a London dandy, he
Dried up and egotistical,
Drinks only red wine by the glass;
Drives home from this domestic scene.
Drives out and strolls, at leisure swanning,
Drives out to join a masquerade.
Drives sleepily through city streets,
Drunk, eaten, moped, declined, got stout
Drunk as a swine, this precious hostage
Dryads, in pensive mood immersed.
Dull shore that gives me no delight,
Each day is dear, each hour too:
Each day met riding. Soon the men
Each day up to her porch he ventures,
Each time I prayed in hope of cheering
Each waited for the machinations
Each wanting something different cleared:
Each, cool and silent, must commence
Each took his pistol to the place.
Earth's tribute ready to be paid.
Eavesdropping on the heart's first sound,
Eccentric, sad, exuding danger,
Eccentric's rushing to his lady,
Eight rubbers; and as many times,
Either the pensive vampire or
Elderly dames who looked ferocious;
Elsewhere she scarcely wastes her breath;
Else mother-in-law would have driven
Elucidating Say and Bentham,
Embark upon their fateful meeting,
Embellished by slight calumnies,
Embracing, they would weep  but now
Embroidery seemed made of riddles;
Empty and gloomy dreams to rest;
Empty in spirit and alone,
Enchanting wondrously her mind.
Enchanting world! There shone Fonvizin,
Enclosed him in his gloomy den.
Encourage two young friends to strife
Endeavouring to catch her eye.
Ending his brilliant, wild career
Endowed with G&#246;ttingenian soul, he
Engaged in amicable chat
Engendered much self-accusation:
Engender in his soul compassion:
Engross so much a woman's mood:
Enjoyed a bath with ice on waking,
Enlightenment we don't believe in,
Enlivened by the spring's returning,
Enough, dear chap  the family's well
Enough, get up. I must explain
Enough for fate to take its due.
Enough now! With a soul clear-sighted
Enough to listen to your greeting
Enough! Sing us another song!'
Enough, though, for a winter's spree,
Enraptured, he displayed his mettle
Ensconced before a blazing hearth,
Enshroud a day that's scarcely born.
Enshrouded in the deepest night.
Ensures our universe goes round.
Enters the silent study to
Enters. The ballroom's full to brimming;
Entreat, confess, reproach, imploring
Enveloped in despondency,
Envisaged some catastrophe;
Epicureans to the soul,
Eschews banality, pretence,
Etcetera - for so much more
Eternal truths, pontification,
Eugene had long since lost all patience:
Eugene stood pensively the Poet
Eugene was saved by fate's decision:
Eugene, detesting litigation,
Eugene already has her word.
Eugene arrives and makes excuses.
Eugene remained there, motionless.
Eugene was always pleased to meet him
Eugene with ease discovered there
Eugene! Tatiana, lighter than a
Eugene, the moment that he saw her,
Eugene, who loved him as a brother,
Eugene's immediate reaction
Even by chance, their angry feud.
Even in jest the heart won't quiver.
Evening arrived. The sky has darkened.
Evening will pass, the morrow too:
Even unseen, I treasured you.
Exalted feelings, never fading,
Exchanging it for tallow, wood;
Exchanging them each spring for fresh ones,
Excuse me, Prince, but do you know
Exhausted by the ballroom's din,
Expected some adverse event.
Expecting certain recompense,
Exports across the Baltic flood,
E sempre bene, gentlemen!
Faces one meets with every hour,
Fair ladies who are similar.
Falling asleep with satisfaction,
Falling in stars upon the ground.
Falls to our poet from Tambov,
Falsification, noise and blame!
Familiar hilltops that I call to,
Far bolder than a healthy man,
Farewell, familiar woods near by;
Farewell, glad nature that I cherish;
Farewell, my freedom that must perish!
Farewell now, peaceful dales, farewell to
Farewell the refuge that I'd hide in!
Farewell to golden games, for ever!
Farewell to you, Petrovsky Palace,
Farewell, the beauty of the sky,
Farewell. Whatever you may chart
Fashion's most recent specimen.
Faster, Andryushka, hasten, hasten!
Fated to roam without resort,
Feelings we find ridiculous.
Fell maddened with remorse before her.
Fell sulking and, with indignation,
Felt fear as well - but that will do 
Fickle adorer and spectator
Fidget, while coachmen round a fire,
Finding himself at this huge banquet,
Finding him wholly dissolute:
First let us puncture vanity
First listen, am I right?, I see
First, that he'd not the right to sport
Fit for a fashion illustrator,
Five further paces they traversed.
Five versts away from Krasnogorye
Flares up with jealous indignation
Flash, captivate and fly away.
Flattering to entertain and charm,
fledglings of the Lyovshin school,
Flew headlong through the dusty air.
Flicking his straying hair apart,
Flies off like fluff across the skies,
Flies tiptoe to a passing man,
Flies to the mill, the horses strain.
Flow forth aglow with verities.
Fluff up her curls to look more fitting,
Followed by long and narrow glasses,
Fond early on of reading novels,
For all that you have given me;
For all the countryside is freezing,
For being by the heavens blest
For being predisposed to trust,
For billets doux and declarations
For country quiet: there I thrive:
For days and nights to wonder when
For every pastime thinkable,
For fear of getting Eugene fraught;
For luxury and modish languor -
Forever satisfied with life,
Forget renown and eulogy,
For God's sake, that will do, good fellow.
For governing her husband's life,
For him our life and destiny
For him there are no more enchantments,
Forgive the fever of the young,
For long a heartsick enervation
For long had her imagination,
For loving without double-dealing,
For money' sake and it was here
For our encounter - which I crave;
For sighs and boredom and deception
For sombre Russia, for the portion
For something new, no matter what.
For so much talk - an interlude
For two long minutes they were quiet,
For two whole days the lonely meadows,
Forever merry as the day,
Forever modest and submissive,
Forgetting both the town and friends,
For Eugene has not changed a bit,
For her to meet a monk in black
For him at an exalted site.
For household business claimed the day,
Forgive: I love Tatiana so,
For Olga, young and beautiful,
Foreseeing always their conclusion;
Forsake the city gates, make haste!
For all the dazzle she possessed.
For all the tears she has suppressed,
For all those places I recall,
For day to end he cannot wait.
For dear Tatiana, she is gone 
Forbidden fruit provides more spice,
Forgetting feasts and opulence,
Forgetting her Olympian speech
Forgetting monde and noisy ball,
For Eugene in the dark of night,
For long  for ever  in his track
For Moscow on her bended knees
For noisy, glittering vanities 
For one wild garden and a book,
For our poor home, to me the dearest,
For several days thereafter she
For someone feigning oddity,
For some presumptuous glance, opinion
For steppe-land song she found appealing 
For strange, scant tongues the tribesmen teach,
For which all else she would forgo,
For which we should accord him praise.
For which will my young scamp be leaving?
For whom among these jealous daughters
For whom she seems ideal perfection,
For whom, to expiate your wrongs,
For you how long ago did I
Found uncle on a table laid,
Four fatal steps the two had taken.
Fragments of Nordic balladry,
Free from their stormy depredations,
Free now, I seek again the union
Friends, enemies were in attendance,
Friends of Ruslan and of Lyudmila
Friends, not a single one, believe me!
Frightening shadows gather thickly,
Frightening to a timid swain,
Frolic, if you're timorous,
From Albion's proud poetry.
From box or stall, to judge her class.
From dark-eyed, fair-complexioned maid,
From different entrances to guard her,
From dream to dream, she no more grieves
From empty rumour far away,
From every devil's library,
From fireplace and the double windows,
From her accustomed room and bed.
From here he watched, in thought immersed,
From here I picture the occasion:
From her for ever separate;
From hour to hour with still more rapture
From late at night to break of day,
From mist-enveloped Germany:
From morn the Larin home's abounding
From proper gentlemanly distance;
From Romulus until this day.
From the Aeneid a verse or two,
From thirty-odd right down to two;
From which I'm disaccustomed now.
From which the world will never profit,
Frost gleams. And we take pleasure in
Gallops away, in thought rehearsing:
Games we girls play privately.
Gave to her heart much more delight.
Gay magpies gathering beyond,
Girls whisper in a corner space;
Girls' smacking kisses, barking pugs,
Give him this note for O  for that 
Gives up herself without conditions
Giving her lessons privately!
Glances into the garden bare 
Glances that fly from every angle,
Glitters and whirls. But from his bed
Gloomy and dismal, sad, forsaken;
Glory and good! The tune is piteous,
Glowing on ancient cupolas.
Glued by the ice, two flimsy staves
Goddess of sighs and secret places;
God grant them life for many a day!
God save his soul, he was so patient,
God, no! Much better to remain
God grant you find here just a grain
Gone are the choirs to which we hearkened;
Gone  Wait, his profile's in between.'
Gone! Where's the ardent agitation,
Good sir, my income's much too slender.'
Goodbye to her, his youthful maid,
Goodbye.' And she's alone at last.
Goodbye, my lively, long endeavour,
Goodbye, strange comrade, now for ever,
Greets with a smile the new year's morning.
Grew wild and shared their daily rhythm,
Grey-haired Filipyevna treads lightly,
Gripping the pistol in his hand,
Grow pale and waste away - that's rapture!
Grows pale, is wasting, does not speak!
Grows up, gets animated, seethes,
Grumble or drink, somehow or other
Guests make their bows and shuffle by,
Guillot brings dressing-gown and slipper,
Guillot was standing, disconcerted.
Gvozdin, a splendid lord who flourished
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov
Habit allayed the grief she suffered,
Habit is heaven's gift to us:
Had been aware, in some way learning,
Had brought a stanza for Tatiana,
Had brought him bliss and painful lessons,
Had brought to Tanya's solitude,
Had changed in him a soul whose fire
Had driven down to his estate
Had I been hopeful to expect you
Had in this heart vibrated, churned,
Had long abandoned reading, still
Had long ago arranged the day.
Had made on all the Larin folk
Had opened, roaring, under her.
Had stirred from early days his blood.
Had struck Onegin, what they meant,
Had struck: the poet, with no sound,
Had talked about these gentlemen.
Had, heedless, left him in the cold?
Had, in her humble lot, neglected,
Had once by him been torn apart?
Hailing another, or the entry,
Half-opened still, condemned to wither.'
Happier still who knew it not,
Happy is he who can alloy
Happy who tasted their excitement
Has by a friendly hand been killed!
Has crept beyond the gate.  Farewell,
Has he returned in novel style?
Has met an end untimely. Hard
Has not expressed itself in Russian,
Has painted early snow for us
Has plied his wonder-working brushes
Has run in turbid streams that eddy
Has sped by coach to make his call.
Has stirred his sluggish soul to fever?
Has withered at the morning's dawn,
Haunted by days he can't regain.
Haunted by rhymes and yearning's ache,
Have gained him royal favour, fame?
Have reconciled the friends again!
Have scarce their saucers in their hand,
Have, it is true, become a bore;
Have no idea; and what's the point?,
Have passed since in a dreamy haze
Have two small feet caused me to suffer 
Have your fling, my darling ones.
Having changed places, are reseated;
Having completed Chapter One.
Having diverted you concerning
Having made taste an industry,
Having no common views to share,
Having retired from noble service,
He could, no matter how we pressed him,
He could express himself and write,
He did not have the scholar's temper
He'd mildly check a boyish lark
He enters: cork to ceiling goes
Here was a youth with charm and mind.
He flies, ascends the marble stairway,
He gave three balls a year, impervious
He'll be wherever on the dot.
He'll wake past noon, and till next morning
He was by fortune talented
He won respect by his demeanour
Her waist she twists, untwists; her feet
He's dreadfully dissatisfied;
He, like Childe Harold, would arrive
He brought with him the fruits of learning
Here, there was dullness, there pretence;
He found the grounds full of attendants;
He locked himself inside his den,
He noticed nothing any more.
Help in his soul despising men,
Herds wandered through the meadow ground,
He eased the peasant yoke, replacing
Here was a crank most dangerous.
He fled their noisy conversations:
He had no appetite to hazard
He heeded Lensky with indulgence.
He laid his trusting conscience bare.
Her ancient hand raised in the air,
He loved, ah, as we cannot know it,
He opened up the cupboards there:
He sang of distant lands, those spheres
He sang of life's decaying scene,
He sang of love, to love obedient,
He sang of parting and despond,
He sang, too, of romantic roses;
Her childish merriments and sport.
Her elder sister was Tatiana 
He destined Olga for my bride,
He settled down - to the distraction
Her eyes as azure as the heaven,
Her father was a decent fellow,
Her flaxen curls, her smile so even,
He shared the games that she selected;
He thought that friends would, in like manner,
He thought that he should be united
He took instead to groveland cover,
He tried to stop his lips from making
He who has felt will be forever
He who has lived and thought can never
Her husband was her fiance then,
Her husband wisely left, the morrow,
He died an hour before his dinner,
He was a simple, kindly barin,
Her bosom lifts, her features redden,
Her chosen dream so fervently?
Her countenance is round and fair
Her ears with sound, her eyes with light
Her heart's abounding plenitude;
He wished to write - but could not manage
He with his lyre roamed ever further;
He witnessed, tenderly elated,
Her liking more than her intended:
Her loosened and unruly hair,
Her love for him was not connected
Her Moscow cousin, when she'd seen her,
Her rosy freshness, in no manner
Her secret glow, her dreamy mood,
He used to hold me in his arms.
He wanders, and his soul hears not
Her head sinks downward to her shoulder,
Her light chemise that won't enfold her
Her slender fingers knew not needles;
Her tears and, there before her sitting,
Here in our home, where we could speak,
He has forgotten us, that's plain.'
Her heart retains a dream of hope.
Her monogram and graven seal.
He promised that today he'd come.'
Hearing amid the noise and lull
Hears nothing. In the orchard, maids
Her voice, her slender waist and stance
Here's Eugene! God, how will I cope?
He finds it fun, the pain he scorns,
He gave his arm with some compassion.
He leaves a tender verse behind,
He'll hold you fast, there's no denying,
Health, bloom of life that sweetly flowers,
He neither dreamed of nor foresaw.
He only dares from time to time,
He reached the river by the hill;
Hearing my strophes' sweet-toned chants,
He's constantly beside her, whether
He sets off on the journey home,
He sketches pictures for his bride -
He sometimes takes and reads out for her
He sought them with no great affection
Heaven no doubt has ruled it so.
Her little voice more tender than
He answers: it is Agafon.
He lays the maiden on the floor.
He wooed them with insouciance;
Her silken girdle she unknotted,
Her trustfulness, her pure devotion.
He's with his Olga occupied,
Her by the neck, then forcefully
Her hand is trembling, yet she's shy
He also put into the scales
He boldly put belle Tatiana.
He brings her solace when she grieves,
He calls you proudly to a duel,
He cannot bring me happiness.'
He chides the uninvited pair;
He'd dupe a fool or stupefy
He'd fall himself into a trap.
He'd had enough of them for years.
He drinks - they shout and drink a round.
He entered  ah now, what's he saying?
He gives a sign - they spring to action,
He in his soul began to sketch
He knits his brow - there's not a sound.
He laughs - they roar with satisfaction,
Her discomposure, tired expression
Her eyes in search of Lensky turning,
He could dispute and be amusing,
He does not hear his neighbour, who
Herds low, the hush of darkness brings
He'd don his glasses and agree
He gazes with sweet feeling, heartened
He guides her, nonchalantly gliding,
He is an honest guy and eager.'
He is insensitive and still?
He kept consulting watch and sun.
He lay inert; uncanny-seeming,
He left forthwith; Eugene, remaining
He looks and calls  but there's no power
He looks outside - and sees, alack,
He might have learned life's true dimension,
He might have manifested feeling
He must depart, yet as he bade
Hearing the woods' new murmuring;
here age-old fashion is the rule;
He rings: his valet, French and chipper,
He simply bows, yet in his eyes
He sleeps with her and never leaves.
He's even honest - thus our age
He's happy, almost well today 
He said he'd  always be prepared'.
He sees before him Olga full
He's here: Monsieur Guillot, my friend,
He's left behind a dismal trace.
He should have set about the healing
He should have started some time back.
He slowly stiffens, ossifying,
He's someone I can recommend.
He sought a duel with his friend.
He's vicious and a gossip, too.
He tells his valet to retain
He trembles, can't think what to say,
He twirls her near the company,
He was a maestro with a pistol
He was not stupid; and, despising
Her heart with greater perturbation
Here is the fireplace,' said the crone:
Here master used to sit alone.
He is forgot, his bride has given
He isn't here. They've never met her 
Hearkening not to friendly clapping,
Herself already to be wed,
Her journey home is long deferred.
He used to dine here in the winter
Her soul pervaded by the shadows
Her summer in the country, wending
Her walks continue, lasting longer.
Here are hussars on leave, invading,
Here are inveterate fops, parading
Here Bonaparte chose to reside
Here is the North now, storm clouds driving,
Here next, by leafy grove surrounded,
He waited - but in vain he waited -
Her ancient mobcap made of tulle;
He casts a fluffy boa, if he
Her heart's fond treasure, blissful, aching,
Her loud, protracted wails, laments
Her native gifts, began to sport
He'd killed his friend; bereft of pleasure,
He lacked employment and a wife
He lived with neither work nor goal
He's Eugene. Really? Yes, it's clear.
Her bow is equally serene.
Her novels and the country flowers,
He could not  She then spoke, inquiring
Here an ambassador was speaking
He enters in a nervous manner,
He found his way back after all,
He found no trace in her that loosely
He keeps his resolute lorgnette
He leaves the packed hall hurriedly
He scarcely can reply to her.
He scrawls a courteous  Yes, I'll be there.'
He wakes; an invitation's brought;
He wanted to address her  yet
Her husband enters, interrupting
he young spectator now is drawn
Her rural life: the tranquil bowers,
Her soul, whatever her impression
Her tone remains as it had been,
Her transport all her own for fear
Her youthful little dove now hastens
Here there were several spinsters, who
Here was Prolasov whose distinction
Here was, to epigrams addicted,
Here was, with scented, greying hair,
Here were, in mobcaps and in roses,
He shadows her in every place;
He's happy if upon her shoulders
He saw in letters little use;
He separates before her or
Her handkerchief picks from the floor.
He almost grasped the mechanism
Here is his letter, word for word.
He gets no answer to this letter,
He leaves upon one cloudless morning
He looked a poet to the letter:
He read again, but all at random:
He read the sceptic Bayle,who led him
He sees on melted snow, recumbent,
He sees past enemies forgotten,
He stays: beforehand he'd been ready
He's hardly entered than towards him
He sat alone as flames would dart,
He tried some authors of our own
He walks in like a corpse, nobody
He wore your pencils down, Saint-Priest;
Her stubborn lips remain in place!
Him does repentance always gnaw.
Him does the serpent of remembrance,
Himself appears in such a pose.
Himself at billiards, starts to play
Himself by passion invalided,
Himself that evening where he'll go.
His aching inactivity -
His ageing uncle's death as well?
His carriage, soon he's at the gate.
His cotton cap, already has
His cows abroad while night is clinging,
His daily life and occupations.
His dinner and adoring wife
His doubting heart's uncertainty;
His enemies, and friends to boot,
His eyes roam wildly seeing him here,
His father could not understand,
His father died upon the instant.
His father lived on borrowed cash,
His fortune to a crafty deuce.
His friends and kept him entertained:
His friends towards the farthest pace,
His gaze not pain, but death expresses.
His glass, a toast to his fair neighbour,
His hand upon his breast he presses
His head towards his shoulder bending,
His heart forgetting praise, alone,
His heart's ungovernably caught!
His heart was on the point of breaking.
His horn to gather them around;
His humour halfway mixed with bile
His inward eye saw others hinted.
His life rolled on without a hazard;
His lines aloud, by fervour seized,
His look of inspiration blind -
His manner gravely elevated,
His many eccentricities.
His melancholy does not slacken:
His moment's bliss with my rejection;
His mother from her window warns 
His mottled sandals made of bast.
His nag then somehow starts to trot;
His neighbour standing at the door.
His neighbours' hospitality;
His neighbour in the finest phrasing
His neighbour's humble gravestone, mourning,
His pen breathes love, his tender entry
His pencil marks by certain lines.
His pipe's first moan of melody.
His pistols, ready for the fight,
His presence by Prince N is sought
His prime thus passing, unfulfilled.
His relative and friend, Onegin,
His selfsame life will go on turning
His senses clouded, and he merely,
His silenced lyre might have extended
His song possessed the clarity
His soul full of regrets and woes,
His soul showed here in noble light
His strange approach to Olga - all
His tardy sleep is worried by
His tea-and-rum cup relegated,
His thoughts were far away, as old
His time, without me, will arrive;
His youthful dream of ecstasy,
Hm! Hm! I ask you, noble reader,
Holding a happy stirrup  feeling
Holding a paper, turns her way
Homage, congratulations greet her;
Homer, Theocritus he rubbished,
Hope nursed his feelings, gave him courage,
Hostility with calumny,
Hours passed - time that the tea was set,
How bitingly he would beget
How did you marry, then?'  Oh, Tanya,
How fiery, when he spoke, instead,
How languid, when no word he said,
How often did the summer court us,
How rapid was his look and bashful,
How self-forgetting he could be!
How, in my childhood, oftentimes,
How are the Larin girls, I wonder,
How changed Tatiana is, adapting
How life had revelled, blood had burned;
How long?'  About two years.'  To whom?'
How long had he been here, and whence,
How long since, each to each a brother,
How long since they from one another
How often, sadly separated,
How often I got drunk on you!
How often, moonlit, like Leonora,
How often on the shores of Tauris
How often would she, fond companion,
How sad, however, if we're given
How sad to me is spring's arrival,
How soon he knew how to bedevil
How soon he learned the skill of feigning,
How Tanya's grown! How long, my dear,
However turbulent its duties,
How whispers speed around the hall 
How, holding back her indignation,
How with the heart and mind you have
How wondrous-languidly she gazes! 
Hummed Idol Mio, Benedetta,
Hymen's concerns and tribulations,
I have no leisure to impart,
In banishment and deportation
In dusty chronicles to trace
In French, which he'd by now perfected,
Indifferent to its latest rages,
I liked to stroll there formerly,
In letters of the heart how casual!
Inspiring faith and undermining,
I've suffered ballets long enough,
Invents for our frivolity,
In front of mirrors in his lair,
Inviting him to a soir&#233;e:
In this case judged wrong-headedly.
Is dressed, undressed and dressed again?
I could regale the world of learning
Illumination row on row,
Imagination seethes, excited,
In days of revelries and passions
I beg you, note my every word,
Indeed, I offer my excuses,
It's dark: into a sleigh he settles.
I'd go insane about a ball:
In all of Russia. Long indeed
I call to it: it's time, it's time!
I love their little feet, yet guess
I love them, dear Elvina, under
I love the youthfulness and madness,
Immodest sighs or glances candid,
In a mysterious gondola
I'm only writing this to show
I recollect my envy of
I to this day would love a ball.
I want you always on your guard.
In blissful shade sleeps quietly in.
In drawing rooms, dejected, languid;
In each the heart had lost its zest;
I beckon every sail and clime.
Indeed, quite suddenly the steward
I liked his personality,
In innocent pursuits I wander,
In its unchanging, motley way,
In short, is what we call khandra -
Initially, I was confused
I know it well, to me it's kindred
I'll spend with a Venetian daughter,
I sleep a great deal, little read,
Into a greenwood, so were we
I wake each morning ready for
In cantos, twenty-five or so.
In idleness and shaded ways?
I always note with satisfaction
I have a plan already for it,
If destiny preserves my verse.
Imagine females in discussion
Imbibe the magic bane of yearning,
I'll pay the censorship my debt;
I've been through them with little joy.
In Petrarch's footsteps, and besides
In Petrarch's tongue, the tongue of love.
In this perceiving no privation,
In winter on a cast-iron fender,
Is master former enemy
Is overdue, and similar
I write, my heart's no longer pining,
Is wakened by the drummer' beats.
I'm sad still, but the tears are gone,
I really cannot fathom why;
Intelligence, nor with the art
Into that very room he settled,
I've scrutinized it all for any
In friendly greetings he delighted
In sensible and ancient taste,
In sudden flame his soul burst forth,
In toto to despise mankind,
I'd really be a fool to thwart
Immune to jealousy's invasion,
In densest grass, unnoticed by
In eavesdropping on the confessions
In girlish innocence and grace,
In leafy shade, by oaks protected,
I know, of course, that it is redolent
Imparts mamma's morality.
In all, he cheerfully believed her,
I can't recall a thing. Alas,
I can't sleep here, nurse, it's so airless!
Inside a quilted housecoat wrapped.
In keeping with good taste, well bred;
I'd find it sad now to depart
In moonlight overcome by mist,
Informally, arrived to rue
I offer you, then, my oblations,
I played with his Ochakov medal!
I see the L&#225;irins.'  That's amazing.
In winter when the shade of night
Is still condemned to loving thus:
It's time to leave you for the ocean,
Its nullity I've comprehended
I've shut my eyelids now to phantoms;
In glorifying my sad mission,
In having just a single sound
I do not see why that's so shocking.'
I fear the lingonberry juice
I hate your fashionable mocking;
In fantasy she visualizes
I'll gladly.'  When?'  Why, now's all right.
I'm happy with a homely clan,
Is simple, but a dear old person;
It's boring, that is why, dear man.'
I'd choose the other for my wife.
In Olga's looks there's no more life
Iniquitously, he committed
I'll have them quarrel once again
I'll settle to prosaic labours;
Impassioned speeches made when young
In front of you and everywhere
I am confused'   Nurse, tell me truly
I shall in grim relief narrate,
I shall no longer be a poet,
I shall recall the tender feeling,
I shall record the plain orations
Into a modish tyrant's keep.
Into an unknown family taken 
I wept for fear of what was looming;
I' m sad and sick at heart, my dear.
I am  in love, nurse  can't you tell?'
I am in love,' again she whispered
I am in love, go, let me be.'
I beg of you, become my shield,
I can foresee another matter:
I cannot tell. But now you'll meet
I gave my word, and what? I fear
In which she seeks and finds some marvel:
In woebegone romanticism.
It's all come to a sorry pass!
It seemed to be God's will. My Vanya
It's  yes  and  no , not  yes, sir ,  no,
I'm on the verge of crying, sobbing!'
Implacable and irreproachable,
Intelligence, a lively will,
Into a bodywarmer fitting;
Its light. Upon her elbow leaning,
I've known fair beauties unapproachable,
I've marvelled at their modish manner,
I've seen like women in my days,
Is it not true: those charming creatures
I know that tender Parny's ways
It's still not used to postal prose.
It used to be my predilection
I must translate Tatiana's letter,
I read it with a secret shudder
I shall respect antiquity.
I turn to you, my poets, teach us;
I've not the strength to be repenting,
If only seldom, once a week,
I could enjoy another meeting.
I never would have known this anguish;
I never would have known you, thus
I would have troubled you, dear fellow,
If you had still remained with me,
Inclining gently at my bedhead,
Into enchanting melodies.
I was marked out for you from birth;
It has been foreordained in heaven 
I knew you on your first appearing;
I know you're sent by God's provision,
I place it now in your safekeeping,
I would have found a friend for life,
I write to you - what more is needed?
It's in your power, I concede it,
I uttered inwardly: it's he!
If you were here, you'd see me weeping 
Imagine what it's like for me,
I boldly put my trust in you,
I cannot think of where to start.'
I close! I dread to read this through 
I'm faint with shame and fear  However,
I'm frightened that my reason's failing,
I'm old, I'm very old, my heart,
Impatiently until the tension
Inquiry from the ch&#226;telaine.
Into the avenue, there straight
Into the cups ran, in a stream;
Into the garden, mortified;
I wait for you: you can inspirit
In all solemnity maintaining
In windowpane calligraphy,
Is outlined through the mist of dawn,
It darkened: on the table, gleaming,
I read a trusting soul's confession,
I've no more strength. I'll make amends;
If I had wanted life restricted
If I, by kindly fate conscripted,
If I could ever without stricture
In his first youth he'd fallen prey
In our forefathers' vaunted day,
Is free from and has always been!
Is one for ancient apes to play:
It fed a loveless appetite.
It roused into activity
It's for Onegin.'  Oh the letter.
It's morn, all bustle here and there,
It's nothing, nurse, but don't delay,
I'd doubtless choose no other bride
Is always silent, angry, grim
I cannot help, though, my compassion;
In darkness in their room together
Inanities or pure confections
It is a stranger to my soul;
I'd say, without poetic glitter,
In a chilled bottle, as they dine.
I do not merit them at all.
I fear those friends who seek to please.
I love you like an elder brother
I make two ages go to war.'
In case its blunted shoe should catch
I shake with animosity,
I shall not renovate my soul 
In Olga's album writes to please,
In shortened or in lengthened line
In such an album, I confess,
Is surer than from kin or friend:
Is this the lot that you deserve,
It's hard for me to let her go.
It's high time that we married her!'
It's only by the by I'm saying
It's time, my child, to greet the day.
I, too, am glad to pen a verse,
In which Tolstoy with nimble touches
Is noble and '  Here's cause to quarrel,
Is that not so, friend?'  Not a bit!
It is my nurse that I pay heed to,
It is not madrigals that Lensky
I roam beside my country lake
I shall describe without delay
If now Bordeaux is my addiction,
Into the yard - quick, start the meal!
In summer he was up by seven
Is brought to table for the poet,
I like a friendly chat in quiet
Its magical cascades begat
It once enraptured me: I spent
It's glimpsed and gone: we know this, clearly,
I much prefer Bordeaux's quiescence
Impetuous and trivial 
I shall encounter, that's the trouble '
It's as a friend who's always there
It's just a family affair.
I'm sure nobody will be there,
Impatient nature waited, waited,
In every nuance sumptuous;
In guessing cards and the predictions
In just a fortnight he'd be wed.
In servant girls' prognostications,
In sheepskin coat and crimson sash.
I?'  Yes. The family's celebrating
If it should anywhere transpire
Immersed in blissful divination,
In a decrepit almanac;
In frosty darkness Tanya dimly
In frowning beauty, boughs hang low,
In her excursions from the manor
In hope the creature will not find her,
In low-cut frock Tatiana goes
Into the spacious courtyard, training
In so serene and quiet a current 
Instructed by her nurse, Tatiana
Into the wood, up to her knee
In pointed cap and cloaked with fluff
In powdery snow; a long branch catches
In reddish wig, bespectacled.
In the salon new faces, hugs,
In turn Tatiana thanks each guest.
In very terror; surely we
Is first to drink her health, and she
I like to time repasts at leisure
I wanted with Albani's vision
In my capacity as rhymer,
I got engrossed in recollection
Illuminated by Diana;
Immune to wanton fashion's sway,
Infusing her complacent face.
In vest and ancient nightcap lay.
It puts Tatiana's heart at ease.
It's obvious that he's the master:
It's warm inside his habitation.'
I swear I'll go no more a-roving!
Its pristine charms: the leap and dash,
It isn't possible, she tells him,
I'll die,' she says, but does not stir,
Improves itself at every stage.
Indeed, a strict examination
In fact, as she had always been.
I shall not suffer that depraver
I shan't complain, for I confess
If he had known what wound was burning
If she'd been able to foresee
Into the mud at daring speed;
In philosophical seclusion
In planting cabbages, like Horace,
In public gaze or on the sly,
Instead of bristling like a beast,
In the affair, what's left to do?
Is not sufficiently collected
It was a gentlemanly letter,
I'm happy, am I not, my dear?'
I,' he reflects,  will be her saviour.
Is always thus: with knitted brow,
I have it, ready for your gaze:
I'll be forgot, but you'll return
I'll be your husband to the end.'
If we're to wake or sleep tomorrow:
In duels he took a pedant's pride,
In front of you upon the earth,
I do not see what should prevent him,
Informs his man that time is pressing,
Insulting you while you were drinking,
Into the mystery of the tomb,
Into the pan, and the indented,
Is he, the fugitive, the hermit,
I promise in due time I'll bring
Is slaughtered by your pistol shot
It's hardly pleasant, though, you'll find
It sings and flows. And he rehearses
It's nothing, Olga, I must go.'
Its sound through centuries to come
It's pleasant with a verse to chasten
I'm running after her much less.
I revel in the season, breathing
I set out on another quest
Inside her old environment,
Into your foreign carriage climb,
I've come to know new aspirations,
I've come to know new sadness, too;
I want you as a friend to go!
In early morning now - she started
In his damp grave in mother-earth.'
In some secluded, rural place!
In stillness or in social noise,
In Tanya's close proximity,
In that benumbing world he goes in,
In that intoxicating slough
In you when times were turbulent,
Is it the truth, all plain, unvarnished,
I am exchanging my dear peace
I'll peep at them,' she says, advancing
I thought perhaps she'll take this one,
If not, then borrow - say, from me.'
In every Russian heart! I heard
In recent glory here resounded.
I'm getting quite deranged, I fear 
In some five hundred years our highways
In such a curt and point-blank manner
In the salon, from her divan,
In this exhausting marathon,
In time we're told, from the predictions
In which the epoch was displayed
Is richly dressed for sacrifice.
Is wrested from the family store.
Its dated finery and dresses
It blows, it howls - and winter then,
I scarce can drag my feet, the devils,
Is hard for me to bear, my dear.
Is hearing them without partaking,
I'm good for nothing now, it's clear.
If you but knew some, hollow monde!
Interrogations, gossip, news,
In one another's company.
In your day and in mine the same,
Is still the meek and deaf man who
It's time: good idlers, I beseech you,
It's time that she was settled, yes,
Ivan Petrovich is inane,
I can predict: I shall offend
I led my frisky Muse to prize
I read with pleasure Apuleius
I say you should not try to follow.
I sing a youthful friend, relating
I view the steppe-land charms she's brought.
If our most precious aspirations,
If people of good sense should take you
In every album you can mention
In fashionable London city,
In fast succession have decayed,
I'd curbed myself of that sweet habit,
In front of her, the girls stopped chasing
In spring, when swans call out, imperious,
Instead of acting or because
In that high autocratic court,
In those far days, in dales mysterious,
In those far days, serene and careless,
In tow a weighty general.
Is he the same or more pacific?
I will, I will, without demur!
In love with Tanya like a child,
It is too much to see before one
I' m very fond of this expression,
Into her entrance hall of glass;
In that case, come,'the Prince says, taking
In that remote and distant corner
In this majestic legislator
In throes of love, some fancy wild,
In which her heart spoke, unreserved,
Is he now? What, deep down in him,
Its impulses are more propitious
I've opened up my soul to you?
It is not brooked in her milieu.
I drag myself at random, wander,
I fear that my meek supplication
I hear your furious dispraise.
I know: my end may well be dawning,
I'll give, perhaps, occasion to!
I tore my own; an alien soul,
It still feels like an innovation
I must be certain every morning
If you but knew the frightful torment
Immersed in what looks like a letter,
Imploring aspect, mute rebuke
Includes me in the social round,
In the reception room there's not
In their decipherment engrossed.
In this quick moment of distress!
Is he proceeding? Oh, already
I could not yet distinguish clearly
I'd have preferred, had I the power,
I first saw young Tatiana near me,
I love you why should I disguise it?,
I loved you then, was that upsetting?
I married. Pray you, leave me now.
I may have been, but it is so.
Is there to greet him in the lobby.
Its motley faro cards to him.
I thank you for your honesty 
I was much younger at that meeting
I was not to your liking  Say, then,
I weep  if you recall your Tanya,
In this unhappy circumstance,
It's high time you'll agree, by far.
Jam, endless chatter with regard
Jam in small dishes starts the ritual,
Jesting to make the guileless marvel,
Judge for yourself, my friend, it's clear:
Judge, then, what roses for our wedding
Just as a sleepy convict might
Just let me have a pen, some paper.
Just like the daft moon shining there
Just look  that group  in front, you see 
Just so a casual guest one night
Just so! An earth that will ignore us
Just so indeed, with like elation,
Just what is meant by kinsfolk really.
Katenin reproduced the power
Keeps Monsieur Finemouche in her house
Keeps thinking of it anxiously.
Keep stirring my imagination,
Kept thinking of it secretly;
Khandra had cruelly chased and caught him,
Khandra was there, on guard and waiting,
Kindled at their poetic hearth,
Knew what love was in my young day;
Knows better than Chateaubriand,
Lacking her sister's beauty, poise,
Ladies sit by the chimney-place;
Languished in unproductive leisure;
Lapsed into pensive indolence:
Last evening in such casual fashion
Last night, why did you leave so early?'
Lay in his soul's depravity,
Lay leafing through a book in bed;
Lay until morning, in his home,
Leads forth the folk who'll be attending
Leads to two pines with roots entwined,
Leaning upon a ledge of granite,
Leaning upon the dam stood Lensky
Leaves in the snow a small, wet boot,
Leave now the noisy city spaces
Lel hovering above her head,
Lending the trees a downy cover,
Lensky, a hapless victim, fell 
Lensky, a wealthy youth and handsome,
Lensky replied to the old dame:
Lensky's estate there lives and thrives
Lensky, at home, with hatred blazing,
Lent his young mind a novel thrill.
Lepage's fatal tubes till needed,
Lesson from me on how to tell
Lest I forget of whom I sing.
Lest somewhere a sarcastic reader
Let drop his pistol to the ground.
Let me acquaint you with this fellow,
Let me glance back. Farewell, you arbours
Let not a poet's soul be frozen,
Let others profit by his lesson,
Let Pradt and Scott divert your mind
Let's go, then.' At their destination
Let's hear the oak wood's sound ascending
Let's sprinkle you with holy water,
Let's talk of how things used to be.'
Let's visit them, they'll be delighted;
Let them append here how and why.
Let us go thither where a brook,
Let us lure a fine young lad
Let us scatter, darling ones,
Let us sing a song we know,
Lies a young maiden's looking glass.
Lies down in carpets undulating
Life in old age is such a horror.'
Life's still, as yet, unfinished novel,
Light-hearted, free of care, serene -
Light vapour eddied under it.
Like a small child, defencelessly.
Like Chatsky, leaving boat for ball.
Like drunken Delvig at a feast.
Like ghosts in tedious succession.
Like him, disdaining vanity,
Like him, she dressed to match the fashion
Like Hippocrene it sparkles, flashes
Like lover's dream, another vanity
Like rosy lips unused to smiling,
Like some forbidding phantom gazing,
Like those established long ago '
Like those that praised our mighty nation,
Like vernal storms on meadows sprung:
Like women, books he now deserted,
Like young life's whirl, when spirits soar,
Like your light trace on meadow grass.
Like you and me and everyone?
Listened to Eugene's homily.
Listen to my avowal now;
Lives like a sage, discovering solace
Lives near St Simeon's; last December,
Long did she gaze as through a mist 
Long in my soul your voice resounded 
Long live Bordeaux, our precious friend!
Long was his heart with grief afflicted,
Looked forward warmly to befriending
Looked like a giddy Venus wearing
Looked through the magic crystal's eye,
Looked through the window, swatted flies.
Looks at the stage, then turns away -
Looks he'd forgotten long ago.
Looks round her room, already bright,
Look quickly to the left, my dear.'
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
Lord Byron's whim most opportunely
Lorgnettes when once the ballet's started.
Lost in the village where I languish
Love passed, the Muse resumed dominion
Love's aching words upon my tongue,
Love, hatred, joy and sorrow out.
Love is for every age auspicious,
Love's charming dreams in former days
Love's mad alarms will not deceive me,
Love's pangs continued to torment her,
Love your own self, be your own man,
Loving one thing exclusively,
Madame took on his supervision,
Made light of everything he taught
Madman, to overcome their sting?
Mad conversation of the heart,
Madame de Sta&#235;l, Chamfort in tandem,
Made rough and hard, reduced to bone
Magnificent, resplendent albums,
Maidens prefer the tomcat chants.
Maids' secrets, secrets of the heart,
Maid of the mountains, and of all
Maintains a bachelor family;
Majestic and intelligent,
Make sure their voices can be heard.
Making no sense of this she quietly
Malek Adhel and de Linar,
Mansions, Bokharans, small plantations,
Mantled by storms, with waves contending,
Manzoni, Gibbon and Rousseau,
Married a son quite recently.
May cause my stomach some abuse.
May from his prison-house take flight.
May God consume you with his fire!
May the good Lord protect his daughter!'
Mazurkas entertain the crowd;
Meadows and golden cornfields, patched
Meantime, I need my recompenses
Meanwhile, apparelled for the morning
Meanwhile, enjoy, friends, till it's ended,
Meanwhile, imagination's dealing
Meanwhile, inside a pitch-sealed bottle
Meanwhile omitting certain sections
Meanwhile, Onegin's visitation
Meanwhile, the moon was radiating
Mechanically the word in fashion
Men's talk and horses stamping floors!
Mercy, does it not drive you crazy
Mere affectation - nothing more.
Mere boy, by Olga captivated,
Merely to while away the time,
Methodical by intuition:
Me out in no uncertain way.'
midst daily pleasures to indulge in?
Midst hills in semi-circle lying,
Midst maids and ladies round her throne.
midst splendid conquests and affairs,
Might it not be because convention
Might it not be because my shame
Might she not be in love?'  With whom, then?'
Might well have been quite commonplace.
Might well have proved, by seeking peace,
Migrating south: already dawning,
Mist settled on the fields, the peace
Monotonous and madly whirling,
Monsieur l'Abb&#233;, a threadbare Frenchman,
Monsieur Triquet within its fold;
Monsieur was straightway driven hence.
More agitated in her manner
More candidly than many a life.
More clearly now the true persona
More often to my corner fly.
More often, though, it was the passions
More pleasant, friends, if he howls out:
More than in any other art,
More wondrous, more intimidating,
Moscow, it was of you I thought!
Moscow, whose name reverberated
Mother and Olen'ka are waiting:
Mourned by the neighbour of the manor,
Mouths chew; and, meanwhile, all about,
Must at the mill ere break of day
Must take her to his regiment.
Mute monument of his reflections,
My blood runs cold now - God above! -
My Chapter One you will recall,
My dear Tatiana's heart! If she
My dear, I vow by the Almighty.'
My dear good woman, why not send her
My deeds and diction need improving,
My dreaming maid whom he rejected;
Myself like Byron, bard of pride,
Myself to you. I wonder whether,
My Eugene, like Chaadaev, fearful
My Eugene drew the same conclusions.
My fashionable house, soir&#233;es,
My fate is settled. Injudicious
My father blessed me. Bitterly
My friend, however, walked right by,
My friend Onegin was begotten
My friends, this makes no sense, I know it.
My friends, you're sorry for the poet:
My giddy mistress made me proud.
My God, how wrong, how I've been punished!
My goddesses! Where now? Forsaken?
My grief for his unhappy lot.
My heart's inertia vivify,
My heart to anyone on earth!
My high society successes,
My hoping heart with just one glance
My hour of freedom, is it coming?
My irrepressible Buyanov
My labour's fruits I shall deliver
My last poor penny on its solace.
My Lensky, watching this take place,
My life depends on your decision
My life has been a precondition
My lips will study how to move
My mind back to a bygone past?
My Moscow spurned such self-abasement,
My Muse to join a worldly rout;
My naive longings but who knows?;
My native land and my confinement?
My novel started its career;
My own confession, just as artless;
My pen has lost its former pleasures
My pen no longer wanders, making
My pleasure when a semi-circle
My poor, poor Lensky! Pining, aching,
My second? Yes, let me present him,
My service to you lest you suffer;
My soul retained their secret image
My springtime's ever-golden days?
My student cell was inundated
My tears out at your feet, to press,
My thanks to you. I have delighted
My thanks to you for the enjoyments,
My uncle is a man of honour,
My version, feeble, incomplete,
My wish to do so has abated.
My worthy, venerable reader!
My young poetical endeavour;
My youthful days sped helter-skelter.
Naivet&#233; risks a dangerous end.'
Nature, not yet from sleep returning,
Nature, now pale and tremulous,
Naught touched Onegin to the core
Nay, I shall see you and rejoice,
Near waters shining tranquilly,
Neighbours are many in this part,
Neither the worldly gossiping,
Nevertheless, from head to foot,
Never, in carefree languor, counted,
Night's shades already are receding,
NN's an estimable man.
Nor anything the following day.
Nor did he join that cocky parish
Nor do her cheeks give up their glow,
Nor foreign beauties he could choose,
Nor game of boston, then in swing,
Nor hours devoted to the Muse,
Nor lengthy years of separation,
Nor merry noise, nor meditation
Not cooling distance's relief,
Not having fallen yet from grace,
Not having read at all, would see
Not ice and flame, not stone and water,
Notelets are brought to greet the day -
Nothing proceeded from his quill,
Not knowing a tormented heart,
Not tell a trochee from an iamb,
Not without fault, he also knew.
Now acting proud and now submissive,
No, never did a passion's squall
No, never did I in the fire
No sooner had he finished reading
Now our Onegin, country dweller,
No: soon a coldness numbed his feeling;
Nor was it that she had rejected
Not all, like me, will understand,
Not courting praise, I live and write,
No dearth of silliness and follies,
Not in the least.'  I am nonplussed.
Not known in her simplicity
Not verse and prose are from each other
Now let us condescend to spying
Now talkative, now mute; with her
Now, friends, I hear you put to me,
No doubt the post has kept him busy.'
No less than haughty Muscovites.
Not for the first time; though ill-wishers
No, gentlemen, write odes, that's it,
No, in her passion near to madness
No epigram's vulgarity,
Nothing to make her soul less bleak.
November stood outside the gate.
No fancy could imagine it:
No labour's heard upon the fields;
No longer does the herdsman drive
No more at noontime does he sound
Nobody listens, ladies squeal.
No saws or pictures could be seen,
Noise, laughter, crush as more folk spill in,
Not even Ladies' Fashion could
Not knowing what it presages,
Not possible? Ah, she repels him,
Not possible; and, in impatience,
Not Seneca, not Scott, not Byron,
Now a coquette, a giddy child!
No fiery boy, no fighting kind,
No matter, fate's decree is right.
Nonsense to which a lover's prone;
Nor anything to give her solace
Nor let a worm with venom slither
Nor peoples come to bless his shade.
Nor see a flower two days old,
Not even joy, not only sorrow
Not in an elegiac cloak,
Not long did his beloved weep,
Now Olen'ka like him was yawning,
Now tea is served. We hear no chimes:
Now the mazurka has resounded.
No, this was not a dream for me!
Not wishing to prolong his stay,
Now at a hillock, now a stream
No gift, no feast day she declared,
Nor modish experts train a glass,
Now march,' came the command. And readily,
Now taciturn, now gay. Somehow,
Now this old duellist has meddled
Now with what eager concentration
No hymn will rush to where he's laid,
Nobles and fashion's exemplars,
Noise, laughter, galop, waltz, mazurka,
None could have found in her what would,
None could have said she was a beauty,
Nor by the social mob constricted,
Nor passions that one might declare.
Nor pursed her lips a bit too tight.
Not cold, standoffish, not ungracious,
Not harking to his mind's stern censures,
Nothing betrays her self-possession.
Nothing but dinners in a row,
Not one of them appears to know.
Not only did she not take flight now,
Not wander on so waywardly.'
Now the goddess, so very distant,
Now, looking quietly, she sits,
No hope! He drives from the reception,
Nor turn insane, nor did he die.
Not blaming you: at that dark time
Nurse, leave, I want to be alone.
Nursed proudly in his poetry
Nursing the flame of purest passion,
Observe your daughters' etiquette
Of adolescent turbulence,
Of all his kinsfolk, in a post-chaise,
Of a new ballet that's begun.
Of actresses, who are the rage,
Of all attachment to this life,
Of both his father and his mother 
Of bygone times, which he'd relay,
Of complicated calumny
Of contemplative disposition
of Corneille's genius; there the scathing
O Adriatic waves, o Brenta!
Obedient to the bent of feeling?
Of an impassioned maid's affliction
Of course, dear, I'm at your command.'
Of droshkies in Millionaya.
Of etiquette and worldly canon,
Of feelings, thoughts and magic sound.
Of foreign words and like abuses,
Of frostdust form a silver spray.
Of heart's affairs he had no knowledge,
Of him; by some enchanted force
Of jealous censure, was most careful
Of ladies, and outlandish men -
Of land, wood, water, factory
Of love and suffering I incurred
Of making other minds his own;
Of men, and blind Fortuna's gaze,
Of priceless recompense prophetic,
Of seeming jealous, hiding hope,
Of stern morality no henchman,
Off to Talon's: he's sure that therein,
Of my ebullient youth desire
Of order and a wasteful fellow,
Of public tears and acclamation
Of rugs that yielded to your tread,
Of sabre, lead and martial strife.
Of that exhilerating life
Oh hearken to my call, I rue:
Oh how I wished to join their races
Once by the sea, a storm impending,
Once more I love, once more I smart! 
Once more its contact has ignited
On furs at the theatre doors;
Onegin flies off to the theatre,
Onegin's difference from me,
Onegin to the boulevard
Onegin was prepared to travel
Onegin was to many people
On grass in spring or when they rest
On ladies whom he can't recall;
One still can be a man of action
On our sad snows you left no imprint:
On top of that, they are so gracious,
Opened and shut his vasisdas.
Or cards or verse were there at all.
Or else  you'll need God's intervention!
Originated, reader, too
Or touch a bosom full of languor;
Or where your lustre's not forgotten:
Or will my mournful gaze in vain
Or, to annihilate a rival,
Or guild of which I'll speak no wrong,
Or shadow fixed to him for life.
Or was it that he could foretell
Our plans until a future date.
Out boredom in a country setting,
Over the city's pavements racing
O fields! I am your devotee!
O flowers, country, love, inaction,
Obligingly by what we say?
Of alien fads an explication,
Of all your elegies appears,
Of ancient lore, believed in dreams,
Of army fops, corps diplomatic
Of aspens, birches, lindens bare,
Of beauty inexplicable.
Of bitter scorn for what I send.
Of churches, belfries, gardens, halls
Of comme il faut a phrase which I,
Of countryside simplicity,
Of course, I wonder where he's gone?'
Of course, it was not just Onegin
Of course, you've more than once encountered
Of crimson dawn's already playing;
Of memories of ancientness
Of old-world hospitality.
Of Richardson and of Rousseau.
Of sensible tranquillity,
Of simple maidens' thoughts, of infant
Of something and the dim beyond,
Of the preceding age and mellow,
Of yawning peasants at thanksgiving,
Of young, mustachioed blades who strut,
Off to the banks of Nevsky river
Of custom and the sudden way
Of daubing fleeting leaves, it seems,
Of debts and other bills to foot,
Of distant, dark eternity,
Of every salon, one whose heart
Of fancies that in song she f&#234;ted,
Of flute, bassoon - the army band.
Of heirs to the estate is raised,
Of him or the astonishment
Of how together they might wend
Of its digressions, when it ends.
Of laughter resonate; their eyes,
Of Lensky's heart. Such thoughts soon ceased.
Of love she says not: let's postpone it
Of love until the final hours;
Of maidens and of spirits fell;
Of modish belles the modish foe,
Of modish words a lexicon,
Of Moscow's popinjays and Circes!
Of Olga - such is love's refrain!
Of oligarchic colloquies,
Of once-familiar little feet
Of our benign enlightenment,
Oh come into my golden hall 
Once I myself found it a treat,
One customary, single grief.
One customary, single mission,
Onegin sighed with some regrets
Onegin, whom he'd newly met.
On her designs he did not frown,
On Saturdays to use the bathhouse,
On Trinity, among the throngs
Only the mad soul of a poet
Or maids' rooms! We must all confess:
Or mother; and herself a child,
Or publisher or such-like breeder
Others the selfsame journey take.
Ourselves the ones, all others nought.
Our neighbour is a boor, as mad as
Our secret sorrow's consolation 
Outraged by this behaviour, they
O you, whose memory never fades
Of philosophic measurement,
Of poetry he might have wearied,
Of restful sleep. Alone Eugene
Of resurrecting dead ideas.
Of rural prospects, small and simple,
Of secrets of the heart she keeps.
Of seeing for myself your Phyllis,
Of strolls and rest, then I'll conclude.
Of sudden thought the drawn-out trace,
Of tedious pictures row on row,
Of this unlooked-for tryst, dear friends,
Of those, who, with their wicked smile,
Of trees, its sonorous accents calling.
Of vapour, just apparent, hovers;
Of Volga fishermen, while plaiting
Of youthful feeling, youthful thought,
Oh, by the way, your Larina
Oh give me enemies in preference!
Oh, last night I was so afeard!
Oh, nowadays my head's a muddle.
Oh, she's the sister who appeared
Oh nurse, I need a favour, listen.'
Oh nurse, nurse, I'm not interested.
Oh nurse, nurse, I'm unhappy, aching,
Oh really, nurse, you are slow-witted!'
Oh, ineffectual phantom seeker,
Oh, I've no strength  my poor, tired chest 
Oh, just the house - and garden there.
Oh, my poor Lensky, he at heart
Oh come, friend, does it matter so?
Oh how our years go flying by!'
Oh look, that's me there!' like a lout;
Oh, Tanya, tell, who can it be?'
Old Mother Winter's frolicking.
Old tales that, true or false, I'd tell
Olga alone holds his attention,
Olga's adorer drove up.  Tell us,
Olga, he thought, would be upset
Once Martin Zadek casts his spell,
Once more pursued sweet vanity.
On eating, secretly, a berry
Once used to you, I'd cease to love
Onegin steals a quick look for
Onegin then approached her, said:
Onegin waits: here's Lensky, splendid!
Onegin was profoundly stirred;
Onegin, from his chair, eyes flashing,
Onegin snatches up a knife,
Onegin stands with upraised arm,
Onegin's taken Lensky's life.
On it the Chinese teapot, warming;
On pages meant for recollections,
On seeing in the distant brush
On Tanya's youth a darkness lowers;
On what our heroes have to say.
One poet, rich in stylization,
On britska, coach, kibitka, sleigh.
On Christmas Eve he called on me:
Once, when you heard its thunder peal,
Onegin, chuckling and reviving,
Onegin stayed at Olga's side,
Onegin to the window went
On peasant farmers badly off;
One or two minutes spent on chat,
On noticing his friend had vanished,
One that we all cherish so,
On everything Eugene was mute,
Once more. Behind a stump nearby
Once, Vyazemsky, on meeting Tanya
Onegin fired  the moment fated
Onegin hurries with his dressing,
Onegin sleeps on at his leisure,
Onegin then to Lensky called:
Onegin watched Vladimir's going.
Onegin will not want to wait.'
Onegin, shuddering, swiftly flies
On Schiller's verse by candlelight.
One moment earlier inspiration
One must obey a strict tradition
On horseback through the fields alone,
On to the flooded fields below;
One winter would be worth the price.
One with a dog's face, horned, abnormal,
On my capricious Muse depending,
On wide arcs over waterways,
Only a deathly pallor covered
Only infuriate my mood.
Opened to me inside the walls.
Open the window, sit by me.'
Oppressed her like a grievous dream.
Or as Der Freisch&#252;tz might be played
Or Baratynsky lent his lyre,
Or be judiciously abusing,
Or else, fatigued by joy's profusion,
Or seminarist with a greeting
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Or, if not, a perfidious tempter?
Or draws a dove atop a lyre
Or has that versifier's guile
Or, cheerless, when the leaves of autumn
Or here I am no longer jesting,
Or, following a boring dinner,
Or am I now estranged from pleasure,
Or at the very least for fame;
Or check expenses, if inclined,
Or did she only briefly rue?
Ordered a table laid for two.
Or frightful dream that makes no sense
Or gentler like a butterfly
Or if a falling star should fly
Or if, in fiery pique, not thinking,
Or interrupt this heavy trance
Or in the garden, arm in arm,
Or kiss the border of her dress.
Or plays with her like a coquette,
Or repartee worth not a jot,
Or see a swift hare cross her track,
Or we, in troubled contemplation
Or whether it should miss - all's well:
Or whisper, seeing Olga near,
Or, on the Lethe, lulled to slumber,
Or at the bath with new snow falling
O epic Muse, of my exertions,
Of richest blooms and sweetest fruits.
Of Russian poetry of the time -
Of wandering tribes, and, living with them,
Of watch-endangering excursions;
Of whom the world's opinion ran:
Old women smiled as she passed by,
Once more Onegin cannot fit
Onegin once more busies us.
Onegin pales, can hardly function.
Onegin peers with searching gaze:
Onegin pines away, is he
Onegin's Letter to Tatiana
Onegin, you recall, do you,
On land again, let's send our greeting
On these he concentrated most,
Or cross that few will gladly bear.
Or does he still play the eccentric?
Or else some lengthy, crazy tale
Or else some other jeu d'esprit
Or even my own Demon. Thus,
Or imitative artifice,
Or letters from a fledgling give.
Or maybe a satanic monster
Or, failing this, made him a poet -
Or light relief from labour's yoke,
Or motley liveries, like soldiers,
Or question mark, as they occurred.
Or simply as a decent fellow,
Or suddenly turn crimson, white 
Or the mistakes I've made in grammar -
Our bridges, now forgotten, rot,
Our dormant hero has not started,
Our dreams and years we can't recover,
Our first success encouraged us,
Our freshest dreams, imaginations
Our friend respected Tanya's plight
Our Grandison, do you remember?'
Our hero's recent domicile,
Our idol, honour's spring, which, wound,
Our neighbour  Tell him not to chat
Our Paris of the towns about,
Our Petushkov seeks Olga out,
Our Russian speech, to no avail,
Our stomach is our faultless timer;
Our youth as something to betray,
Out back to more familiar parts.
Out in the backwoods? Walking? Try.
Out in the country, on her own,
Out in the open, undeflected,
Out of a novel, just the manner.'
Out of the valley's brook they border.
Out on the moonlit dark unending,
Over a friendly bowl of wine,
Over a spouse who keeps her guessing
Over that humble urn beneath.
Over the hills and fields below;
O humans! You're so similar
Oblivion, when the tempest buffets,
Oh, much by fate has been undone!
Onegin, and bid him goodbye.
Page after page kept turning faster,
Pale copy of a vivid picture,
Pans, jars of jam, and chairs and chests
Partaking sorrow and affliction,
Parterre and stalls - all seethe and roar;
Partings, and tears as love recovers;
Passed on to him a note from Lensky.
Past borders, little bridges, lawn,
Past monasteries, gardens, sleighs,
Past sentries, peasant women dashes,
Past street lamps, shops and errand boys,
Past the hall porter like a dart
Past whole-glass windows shadows flit
Peers through a chink  the scene's unsightly,
Pelt him with our cherries, dears,
Pensive, again to boredom banished,
Pensive again, again dejected,
People are friends from idleness.
Perceive in home life but a show
Perfumes in crystal vials to pamper
Perhaps a glow of old emotion
Perhaps a special niche created
Perhaps by heavenly decree
Perhaps he was for good intended
Perhaps his martyred shade in flight
Perhaps in thought we may recover,
Perhaps my feelings are misguided,
Perhaps my head already aches
Perhaps some future ignoramus
Perhaps there's not so great a difference
Perhaps you've seen by the Neva
Perplexed, not knowing what to think,
Petrovsky Castle stands. Dark pride
Pined for his native Italy.
Pink as a Palm Week cherub, shone,
Pipes from Tsargrad, inlaid with amber,
Pique? Vanity? Or, once again,
Pity, I'm too infirm to go,
Plaiting his wretched shoes of yore.
Plants its red feet upon the ice,
Pleasant to watch the fellow hasten
Please favour the felicities,
Please, can I see the house?' asked Tanya.
Please send your grandson on his way.'
Please tell me which one was Tatiana.'
Ploughing up fluffy snow in furrows;
Poetic fire, perceptive wit,
Poets, I'll note, in this connection
Polite and cold and to the matter
Poor Lensky can't believe his eyes.
Poor Tanya in the new princess!
Poor Yorick,' he declared, dejected,
Portending losses and mischance;
Portraits of Tsars upon the walls
Possessed him bit by bit; not tempted,
Possessed no doll nor made pretence
Possesses half the world much longer,
Post-chaises would have proved too dear,
Pouncing upon a moment's weakness,
Poured out by Olga's hand, the steady,
Pour me just half a glass or under 
Pranks, jokes enjoyed, when first they met.
Praskov'ya she'd have called Polina
Precisely so, eight years he killed,
Precursor of the labouring day,
Prepared to clap an entrechat,
Prepared to yield again to bondage,
Prepares for her an elegy.
Prescribe a spa without delay.
Present me.'  But you're joking.'  Promise.'
Presentiments constrained her breast.
Princesse, mon ange!'  Pachette!'  Dear cousin
Prince Shakhovskoy delivered his
Proclaiming something to be guessed,
Projecting rainbows on the snow;
Pronounced the neighbour. Dead! Onegin,
Protects her secret silently,
Provincial and a touch affected,
Pulled from her charming little foot;
Pure love directed to the good,
Pursued her like the very devil!
Put them away, undressed, reflected
Qu'&#233;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?
Quick, to the fields, the land invites
Quite crazy over Richardson.
Quite different, unrelenting pressures,
Raised by degrees his pistol first.
Ravishing, gay, mercurial,
Read, read, not even one was helpful:
Reader, I shall, if you'll allow,
Recall me, like a friend that's found.
Recalling former years' romances,
Recalling love that time enhances,
Recited in a reverie
Redeemed it from disintegration,
Reflecting thus, a youthful scapegrace,
Refrains from frosty pleasantries;
Refusal was a consolation,
Regarding haymaking, the wine,
Regretting what is past, what's gone:
Rehearses for the protocol
Rejoicing in anticipation,
Relieves the heart of all its troubles,
Religiously, I treasure it,
Remember in The Other Version
Repeating things in other ways,
Replaced our rhymesters' gloomy style?'
Reported uncle gravely ill
Resigned, but not without a tear,
Resolve my doubts, my wavering,
Resounding swarm of comedies;
Respected husbands! May I offer
Resplendence of the rosy snows,
Resplendent carpet softly bound.
Rests like a traveller drunk at nightfall
Returned to him in his decline,
Returning home, the two are flying
Returning round the kitchen garden,
Reviling masters with their curses;
Revive it with a jealous fire;
Revive their deafening conversations.
Rewarded with caressing eyes
Rime in the sun when days were freezing,
Ringed round by nymphs, Istomina
Rings out that it is dinner time.
Rings surface in successive order;
Rise, ripen, fall, in quick succession,
Rises with clatter; they all rise:
Rose from her bench in calmer state:
Roused thoughts in him he'd long interred;
Rousseau I'll note with your permission
Russian she knew, but very badly,
Russian, I find, is unbeguiling
Russia's Terpsichore again?
R&#233;veillez-vous, belle endormie.
Reaches his chamber in a flash,
Recalled the girl that he had met.
Reclusive, idle and dejected,
Recovered from oblivion.
Regarding life as mere decorum,
Relatives from a far location
Remaining with him, and the joys
Remembrance of another time,
Reports of infidelity,
Resoundingly on ramrods flicked,
Respond with answers, smart or dumb,
Restored the sufferer to calm,
Returns again now, reappears
Reveals no petty affectation
Ridding himself, on reaching fifty,
Rides headlong, comes upon the stone
Right now I am not up to it.
Ripening in their renovation -
Rocked by the breeze of early morning
Romantic is the term we've coined,
Roosters in cages, pots and basins,
Round her a silken curtain closes,
Ruling the opulent Neva.
Runs through a linden, forest nook.
Sad, cold, I still recall their smart,
Sad is the trace of passions dead:
Said the old lady with a wheeze.
Sailed one lone boat with waving oars,
Sang of the heart that stirs our dreams.
Sang, too, our glorious, ancient themes,
Sat sulking; in his corner he
Save us, O Lord, have mercy, pray!
Saving the honour of my land,
Saw neither man nor habitation
Saw nothing through her tears, but she,
Says nothing, does not see him there.
Scarce breathing and without replying,
Scarce out of swaddling, always mild,
Screened by a hill from wind's intrusion,
Season of blissful walks and wandering,
Season of hopes and tender sorrow,
Season of love, when all's in bud!
Season of warmth, of flowers and toil,
Secluded in the wood's domain.
Seclusion, quiet - thus, in fine,
Seclusion, stillness and the night,
Secret excursions in a sleigh;
Secure in my presupposition
Securely screwed-in flint raised high
Sed alia tempora!Audacity
Seductive notoriety?
Seeing the young moon's countenance
Seek a known face on dreary stages,
Seemed almost ready now to die,
Seem dark to it, funereal?
Seems insolent and out of place,
Seen as a shameful machination -
Sees off its ancestors with wreaths.
Semi-ethereal and radiant,
Semyon Petrovich just as mean;
Sensing the corpse, the horses foam,
Sensing the pair, a road horse, nearing,
Settles the frozen corpse, escorting
Set off, but just as she was turning
Set to a children's melody:
Shacks, merchants, peasants selling wares,
Shadow, is leaping through the manor,
Shaking their heads, the neighbours gather,
Shall I attempt to picture truly
Shall I be here that day ? he said.'
Shall I in silence yawn and cast
Shall recompense your candour by
Shall we not start now?'  If you're willing,'
Sharing my feelings with the fashions,
Sharing the leisure time we spend.
She ascertained the perfect measure
She circles slowly with the other,
She coloured with a dreamy vision
She could not snuggle up to father
She'd learned to utter through her nose;
She drove out to inspect the farmers,
She found the games of catch too vulgar,
She grew enamoured of the marvels
She pickled mushrooms, saved and spent,
She seemed inside her family
She shaved the conscripts' foreheads, went
She sighed after another one
She, not her husband, was the boss.
She braced herself, with trembling hand
She breathes a sigh and, taking over
She could  good God, what has he heard?
She crossed the girl and said a prayer.
She dares not look, strains every limb
She did not read our journals, sadly;
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
She does not hear from our two friends
She does not set upon the letter
She drinks deception's honeydew.
She drops her handkerchief, foregoing
She'd turn quite pale, begin to tremble.
She'd wear tight stays to suit convention,
She entered the deserted pile,
She falls into the snow; and nimbly
She feels herself their heroine,
She feels more strongly passion's sway,
She finds no comforts anywhere
She flies, flies from the porch outside
She follows passion's weathervane?
She gazes - and the heart in her
She halts there at the very brink.
She is Julie, Delphine, Clarissa;
She leaned on it and scarce could stand;
She leaned upon it, silent, sad,
She lifts her veil of gauze and reads
She looked: inside the hall, unheeded,
She looks at him:  What is it?'  Oh,
She loved him  or was she deceiving?
She now forgot, began to call
She opens gingerly the door 
She paid no heed to company
She paid three rubles, one poltina,
She reads delicious novels through,
She runs, and he pursues her still,
She said:  It's he! He's made his call.'
She's mine,' Onegin spoke out grimly,
She's occupied with other needs.
She scurries round and wants to scream,
She seeks a meaningful solution
She trembles, burns and looks behind her,
She was disturbed by every portent,
She writes, with Eugene on her mind,
She wrote, with a beguiling finger,
She yields insensibly and limply,
She, paler than the moon at morn,
She avidly began to read
She breaks into a coughing fit.
She does not care or does not see.
She does not mark, she does not heed him,
She does not stare with insolence,
She d gallop with me on a horse
She feels or the bewilderment,
She gave a start, said not a word
She goes. He stands in desolation
She hastens out; with melting eyes
She is no child now, if you please,'
She led me in nocturnal gloom
She liked the hieratic order
She looks but does not see, detesting
She owes a curtsey to the bard;
She pauses now as doubts beset her:
She pondered - and at once decided
She quietly utters just a word
She's come, herself she scatters, weighting
She skipped down from the porch as fast
She's learned already to betray!
She should abhor in him for ever
She shuns the winter, cannot bear
She sits beside the window, sees
Sheltered from storms, he spends his time
She turns down everyone. And broods,
She visited the humble tents
She was at last alone and free,
She will not see him, maybe never,
She, stifling here, in fancy strains
She is unhurried, not loquacious,
She knows you.'  I live near her home.'
She lets Onegin go on kneeling
She never even moved an eyebrow,
She raised her tired eyes moonward, dreaming
She shows a quiet, simple grace,
She takes in all. The simple maiden
Shines in the sky's untroubled spaces,
Shines like the regal moon alone
Shishkov forgive, can't Russify.
Shocks nobody's propriety.
Should be contempt, of course, but then
Should be so called, I've no idea.
Shoulders and nose above them all,
Should she continue, does she dare?
Should they not spurn the duel's seduction? 
Should they not stop and laugh instead
Shouting and tinkling glass astound her
Showed us a hero dedicated
Shows save the trembling moon, downcast 
Shutters unlock, in columns high
Shy as a doe, in forest hidden,
Shy maiden's album with her blood,
Sighs most your lyre? To which of these
Simple and poor, by love distraught,
Since at your christening I dried you,'
Since Gallicisms are as tempting
Since he, not always, it was plain,
Since he would yawn, indifferent to
Since it's among them I belong.
Since morning dressed, pale as a spectre,
Since my poor style, such as it is,
Sings as the spring rain dots the grass
Sings to the spring; the dog rose flowers,
sir .' All agreed this was de trop.
Sits at the window  constantly.
Sits calmly and at liberty.
Sits down to whist; concludes the game:
Sit down - how wonderful, a scene
Sitting with lowered head and still,
Sit on her own throughout the day.
Sits pale and unadorned, forlorn,
Sketches of female heads or feet
Slave of the Lord and Brigadier
Sleep hovers still before his eyes.
Sleep shuns her bed, will not return;
Slips and falls over in mid-motion;
Slips to expose her shoulder's charm 
Slow Lethe will engulf for ever
Slowing the soul's impetuous pace.
Slumber and of the moon, when she
Small hamlets could be glimpsed around,
Smile, virginal repose and peace -
Snatching clandestine assignations 
Sniffing the snow and hesitating,
Snorts - and the traveller goes tearing
Snow only fell in January, on
Snowdrifts rear up before the maid,
So circumspect, precise and precious,
So different as these men were.
Some few things in some random way;
Some, going further still, asserted
Sometimes, when still in bed he drowses,
Some individuals he spared,
So rend and tear apart my soul.
So, too, the wary veteran,
So a poor butterfly will flutter
So a small winter hare will shudder
Some army poet here has scribbled
Some brilliant lady comes to me,
So full of pious sentiment,
So inaccessible to men,
So will a seed that's fallen in
So, our light-headed tribe, now roaming,
Some would have women reading Russian,
Song of the Girls
So, don't be angry with me, listen:
So bees from honied hives will scatter
Society flattered him with praise:
Solicits the cotillion next.
Sometimes, all company forsaking,
Songs we cherish secretly,
So let us go, do me the favour!'
So like your waist, Zizi, so small,
So miserable and pathetic,'
Soon fire a bullet at my pal.
Soon Lensky's at the sisters' dwelling.
So take it, reader, quickly, please!.
So that throughout the year remaining
Softly, and falls, as, misty-eyed,
Some are no more now, some are distant,
Some four years now, can hardly function.
Sometimes she'll bow out of politeness,
Sometimes she simply takes no notice.
Some minutes they together sit.
Some other spring of older days
Some waywardness, some casual penchant 
So long. You'll stay? Well, stop this fussing,
So many echoes in that word!
So many vacant places there.'
Soon Olya's voice no more resounded
Soon was the youthful bride forsaking
So resolutely to her role,
So travel, too fed his dejection.
Speaks of Onegin far away.
Spent winter only recently
Spins by the crackling splintwood light,
Spoiled by the life he had been granted,
Spot one lone thought, even by chance;
Spreads out a puffy shroud to cover
Spring calls you to the country soil,
Squeezes her hand - her rosy flush
Stands in this fashionable cell.
Stands silently, with disaffection?
Stands still; one foot supporting her,
Stands up; and all the guests before him
Stands with becoming modesty
Starts beating fast and oftener.
Stayed rooted to the spot, and feared.
Stays, album, the Princess Alina,
Stifles a sigh before she starts
Still, after many years, in place.
Still cupids, devils, snakes keep leaping
Still hesitant in forming judgements,
Still holding back the newly wed,
Still hopes and keeps to his agenda.
Still inside, outside, burning bright,
Still more does poor Tatiana burn;
Still Pelageya Nikolavna
Still pleasanter with quiet persistence
Still seething, Lensky sought to shun
Still sleeps a sleep that nought can mar.
Still telling lies Lyubov Petrovna,
Still to this day, without intrusion,
Straightening out his wig, inquired
Straight ones and curved, and tiny tweezers,
Streams silver; and a shepherd's horn
Stretched out a paw, sharp claws protruding;
Stupidity wins our applause?
Subduing innocence and meekness
Such as a girl of mere thirteen
Such in the country was the custom;
Such madrigals to me back then:
Such musings soon became a habit
Such words so carelessly delighting,
Sufficient that upon a field
Sunk a long time in reverie,
Sure to attract the mocking gaze
Surges of virgin reverie,
Surrendered now with all his soul.
Surrendered to a Gallic squad,
Surrendered, the fair summer days
Surround the women and the dames.
Surveillances by mothers, aunts
Surveyed the millstone critically.
Surveying her from top to toe;
Surveys the fields, and speaks in mourning
Suspecting wonders of mankind.
Sweet comfort and a free existence:
Sweeten my mute trajectory
Sweet talk of friends. So many days
Swore he would madden Lensky and
Table, divan of down, two cupboards,
Takes on a brighter coloration,
Takes up his pen and writes his own -
Taking her to his country seat,
Talking with Spain's ambassador?'
Tanya, my dear! We never even
Tanya surrenders to his glamour 
Tanya, what things? Once I was able
Tatiana cast a downward look,
Tatiana catches with surprise
Tatiana, dear Tatiana, vanquished!
Tatiana does not go to bed
Tatiana hears with scant attention
Tatiana held to the convictions
Tatiana listened with vexation
Tatiana seeks the garden bowers
Tatiana's graces, pale with care,
Tatiana! Is it written to?
Tatiana loves in earnest, she
Tatiana met him, in despair.
Tatiana sighed and, though still yearning,
Tatiana's Letter to Onegin
Tatiana trembled, flushed, uneasy.
Tatiana waits for a reply.
Tatiana, sprightly Olga, tell?'
Tatiana, though, preferred to linger
Tatiana's nameday, Saturday.
Tatiana, coming to, looks round her:
Tatiana, from her window seeking,
Tatiana, knowing not the reason,
Tatiana and Anisya parted,
Tatiana cannot help but linger,
Tatiana comes, and she ignores him,
Tatiana cried, he roared at her,
Tatiana dreads this winter's quest.
Tatiana hides - the capers irk her -
Tatiana long as in a vision
Tatiana, terror-stricken, waking,
Tatiana murmured at the tide,
Tatiana quietly pined and suffered;
Tatiana, wholly without bearings,
Tatiana's lying in despair.
Tatiana's scarce alive; Triquet,
Tatiana's touched by the good-hearted
Tatiana saw with trepidation
Tatiana seeks to be convivial,
Tatiana's husband he encountered.
Tatiana to her soul is riven
Tatiana walks, walks on and on,
Tatiana wished the pair God speed.
Tell me the feelings that would rule
Tells you to quell your raging blood,
Tender and bold, while off and on
Than many, Eugene was inclined
Thank God, then, it's no tribulation
Thank God, to shoot himself, but, emptied
Than Bogdanovich's in verse.
Than hunted doe, stays looking down
Than on a merry night to hear
Than Van Dyck has in his madonnas:
Than when a poor wife wastes her tears
Than when a sapling sheds its leaves,
Than you to cherish at my side.
That agitates her heart abates,
That any zealous rot of mine
That constitute our country's roads.
That earned a place in his goodwill:
That even in the names we're given
That fashion's parquet cannot muster.
That fate keeps for you in reserve?
That fervent spirit, oddly yearning,
That gave her equanimity:
That grieve for him  but wherefore grieve?
That he is kissing avidly 
That he must take the duelling-case,
That he was able with a smattering
That hitherto said as a joke
That I had found my past ideal,
That is, he knew how states subsist,
That I have crudely versified
That I shall die here silently.
That I shall see you that same day 
That I stopped sinning long ago.
That lady in the crimson beret
That language with its ardent flair
That Lensky, Eugene would be vying
That little girl  a dream, maybe?
That little girl  the one whom he
That made society appealing;
That monde or husband might suppose
That most revered and blessed wine,
That my free novel would attain.
That nothing can resuscitate.
That nothing else could remedy;
That nothing in her darkened glass
That occupied my anchorites.
That once a slander gets expressed
That once more sets our hearts aquiver
That on the pale horizon moved,
That on their lips a foreign tongue
That oscillates from edge to edge.
That Ovid sang and paid for dear,
That promised them a husband from
That rivalled my embitterment.
That's batted one way or another,
That sacrifices life to rhyme,
That swells beneath a Southern sky,
That's so. But then there's whirling fashion
That Satan plays on gentlefolk.
That seem somewhat absurd today.
That settles on a flower near by;
That she was safe, walked on ahead,
That she with sad presentiment
That soon he'd be among them, yet she
That's very well, but where the deuce is
That their immortal family
That there is no absurdity,
That there were some whom fate had chosen,
That they, despite their stern behaviour,
That they must leave, that they must race.
That they permitted to be heard,
That those good folk whom you've befriended
That virtuous wives will all be true
That wedding plans had all been made
That would have been a boon, indeed!
That you transpose the foreign diction
The Academic Dictionary.
The art's exalted Muses, he
The baker, punctual German, wearing
The blood within my withered heart,
The bouquet of French cookery,
The breath of the indulgent night!
The care with which the women dress;
The child had charm, though boisterous.
The child of luxury and pastime
The crush, the glitter and the gladness,
The cry resounds:  Away, away';
The heart of a professed coquette!
The hero of my novel, pray,
The lofty passion not possessing,
The simple product ready given.
The truth, therefore, was plain enough -
Then to Monsieur passed on her trust.
The bubbling brook's tranquillity,
The captive maids of Salgir's waters.
The country place where Eugene suffered
The cunning spouse, a Faublas pupil,
The dead man buried, feasting followed,
The dreams to which he was addicted,
The droshkies that career away,
The dull life of a bachelor;
There's coughing still and stamping, slapping,
There was Didelot, in glory bathing;
There, in the wings that gave me shelter,
There, Ozerov shared the elation
These graced, at eighteen years of age,
The early-morning noise is cheering,
The house is full; the boxes brilliant;
The lamps illuminate the night;
The latest taste in toiletry,
The little feet of ladies fly;
The madcap sage and rhetorician.
The music now is tired of dinning;
The nails and teeth, and keep their sheen.
Their charming tracks are followed by
There's no securer place at all,
The fair sex ceased to be appealing,
The happiness of youth has passed
The merchant's up, the hawker's calling,
The new still raved about the old.
The nights of golden Italy
The oak wood's leafy cool and shadows,
The oddness not to be depicted,
The Okhta girl, her jug held tight,
The pain of persevering toil,
The priests and guests imbibed and swallowed,
Their charming words and glances cheat
Their classic gracefulness inspires
Their conversation, all in all,
There sounds the lyre with clearer measures.
The first housed an expenses manual,
The innocent might there have offered
The kennels and their kith and kind
The manor house stood in seclusion,
The noble castle was constructed
The old corv&#233;e with light quit-rent;
The old man, by much work perplexed,
The poet's sacred frenzy, strides
The question not infrequently:
Their country carts could be detected,
The room is packed, the noise is loud;
Their sensible deliberations
The rose upon a flaming cheek
The samovar's inviting Lensky.
The second rows of fruit liqueurs
The secret and secluded den
The senses of a gentleman;
The serf blessed fate for what it sent.
The sharp, chilled mind and gloomy bent
The sight of them brings on the spleen.
The small feet of Terpsichore.
The social hubbub left him bored;
The songs engendered by their beauty.
The spurs of Chevalier Gardes jangle,
The story of the human race:
The study of our youthful sage.
The talk, though, of their spouses dear
The theatre's heartless legislator,
The third day he could no more muster
The vessel of his slanderer;
The waves, successively descending,
The whole damn lot there need replacing.
Them with a fevered rhyme: he doubles
Then got to like each other; then
Then will I start a poem - oh,
They bring in a guitar, too, then she
They found each other dull, ill-suited;
The child with her obedient doll
The fruits of learning, evil, good,
The moon amid her constellation,
The moon, to whom when evening nears,
The passing bee or butterfly.
The poet, heatedly contending,
The poet's fervent talk and mind,
The poet's young, romantic story
The poet who confessed his heart
Their ardour and their raving tongue.
Their fathers - friends and neighbours, they -
There's very little taste on sh
These made up Olga  but just glance
The girl was to the altar led.
The idle flow of rural ways.
The ringing laughs and jollity
Their peaceful lives went on, retaining
The rising of the dawn, she loved
The secrets of the grave's abysses,
The sentimental verselets, all
The stars and heaven's brightest light,
The wind that heralds morn is blowing,
Then supper came and close of day,
Then turned to household matters, grew
They fasted twice a year for sinning,
The album of a country miss,
The characters that she most prizes:
The choral dances, guessing songs.
They loved round swings that sent them spinning,
They needed kvas like air for living;
They summoned Olga to provide it.
They touchingly shed tears, three drops
The customs of antiquity;
The earth be quickened by the spring.
The humble sinner, Dmitry Larin,
The husband, squire and erstwhile soldier,
The kind entreaties and the fuss,
The object of your thoughts from far,
Then lingonberry juice is brought
The anguish of my troubled heart?
The lover of Julie Wolmar,
The order of the fare's habitual:
The sometimes onerous ministration
The time had come, she fell in love.
The watchful looks of worried servants!
The world without some recognition.
They're met with the formality,
The authors that she loves so seize her,
The bride I could not love enough;
The British Muse's tales intrude on
The chaste, the cold, the wintry kind,
The children's chosen assignations
The country has its rules regarding
The cunning captive day or night
The day flowed by, there came no letter
The dazzling light of hope imbues you:
The dismal lot that I endure,
The distant space of heaven's dome,
There, not the secret pangs of villainy
There breathes a guileless maiden's yearning.
The fervent author in times gone
The hero, always rapturous,
The jealous agonies of lovers,
The joys of loving they forswore,
The legends of a Russian family,
The letter of my maiden dear,
The letter's ready, folded, who 
The letter trembles in her hand,
The Lord forbid my ever meeting
The lover with new energy
The nightingale sings in the gloam
Their inborn virtue, sense of honour,
There's not a trace of last night's fret,
The mind grows dull, you must admit it,
The rising dawn does not affect her;
The rosy seal, a paper band.
The shame I've suffered all alone,
The silent woods, armed with a novel
The slumber of our Russian maiden,
The table, too. I'll lie down later.
The vagrant Melmoth, restless, gloomy,
The Wandering Jew or the Corsair
They say, though, you're unsociable;
The evening samovar now hissed,
The fame of Lovelaces has faded
The frosted panes; and, pensive one,
The girlish daydreams that beset her
The gossip, rings, the tears, betrayals,
The lake's approach, the copse; has torn
The less we love a woman, woo her,
The letter that you sent I've read.
The more disposed to us she gets,
The notelets of six pages sheer,
Their ringing voices, while she waits
There is no joy for her remaining,
The tears that surely you'd be shedding
The threats, the vows, the put-on fear,
The timeless mutter of the soul,
They love you  like your kith and kin.
The folk whom we do not neglect,
The love you get from tender beauties
Their messages in every space.
There is no greater prize today.
The object of his love and songs -
The satirist's animadversion.
Then drank his coffee, while through some
They fly off from the banks at once.
The life Onegin lived was sainted;
The singer of Gulnare repeating,
They'll show how fate has shaped your years.
The boring feasts and latest trends.
The chilling train of yawns in store
The day was getting shorter now,
The first snow flickers gaily round,
The forest lost its secret awning,
The ice-clad river sheds a lustre
The merry sound of boys on skates,
The naked flatness tires the eye.
They're aimless - that's what makes one weep -
The crown sweet love gave him to carry,
They settle to a game of chess
The cue's forgotten in the shade,
The evening comes, the game is ended,
The fire is out; ash barely covers
The golden coal; a tiny flow
The grate exhales the faintest glow.
The purl of streams, the woodland shade,
The road to find out what it yields;
The sky already breathed with autumn,
The state of nature, which the author
The sun already shone more seldom.
The very mount you ride is wary
Then started talking once again
The autumn weather not yet gone,
The driver hurtles with panache
They whisper to her:  Watch, look up!'
They will not think of us  and may
They will receive us with delight.'
They would arrive and overstay.
The mystery of the nuptial bed
The roof, the fence and flower plot,
The scene is bright and white all round.
The third at night-time. Early waking,
They're nothing more than lowly nature,
The army with a march and drum.
The bear declares:  My gaffer's here:
The bear has gone: beyond the hall
The bear retrieves and carries her;
The frosty beauty that it wore,
The hero of our present novel!
The man she loved so fearfully,
The mincing tomcat, sitting, purring
The odious bear comes grunting, lumbering;
The peasants there have all the riches,
Their hopeful prattle till they leave.
Their life extends before them yet,
The shaggy footman is behind her,
The sleighs, and, at late dawn, the blazing
The trees in winter's silver frond,
The wax that, sinking, leaves behind
The young have nothing to regret,
Then Tanya hurried to be nigh,
They heap up silver with their spades;
The flaming lamps that light the night;
The goblins cower at the sight;
Their bloody tongues - all these mismatches
Their bony fingers, sharp like nails,
Their curved proboscises, moustaches,
Their hooves, horns, tusks and tufted tails,
The shrubs, the path and where it plummets
The sound of reed pipe gently played on:
Then she abandons strength and will.
Then  what was that?  a bear-like tread!
Then my first cousin, one Buyanov,
They reached the bank, where she, concluding
The argument grows louder quickly,
The book that claimed her rapt attention
The chairs are pushed back in a clatter,
The colonel has arranged it all,
The crystal pattern of my soul,
The damp cork pops, the bottle's emptied,
The doors fly open, Lensky enters,
The door stirs. Olga flies to her,
The dream disturbs her. In confusion,
There entered portly Pustyakov;
There's jostling as the hall is filling,
The family of Kharlikov had
The glasses fizz with ancient wine;
The grown-up girls near Tanya waiting,
The idol of each ripened daughter
The index gives the words that awed her:
The men en face; a buzz goes round;
The regimental band is playing,
The starry rays invade the air.
The young things skip, anticipating;
Then the Skotinins, grey-haired, prospering
They seat the two young friends with care.
They shout, laugh, argue through the meal,
They sit right opposite Tatiana;
The guests make room, as each one ventures
The object of my guiltless verses,
The oddball was already angry.
The salutation each extends;
The vial of love's enticing brew -
Then, as Onegin comes to meet her,
The drawing-room receives the crowd,
Then, by his stanza long tormented,
The ardent players to their thrall,
The beds are made. The guests are all
The locals snuffle to their neighbours;
The maiden's air, her lack of zest,
The men unfold the green baize tables,
Then Lensky Tanya; Kharlikova,
The answer to his droll dominion
The bard of Juan and the Giaour
The blow's too much for Lensky; cursing
The couples flick across the floor.
The desolate bard, as in the past
The moment for revenge arriving,
The poet, great but underrated,
The waltz revolves, the music swirling,
Then seats her on a chair, proceeding
There the mazurka thrives, retaining
These have not changed at all, remaining
The fool at eighteen, while he may.
The guests are taken by surprise,
The heart in him, Eugene admired
The hetman of a gaming band,
The parquet cracking under heel.
The play of heel, and the moustache;
The prankster might - so he'd been fearing -
The rooms of Olga and Tatiana
The Russian sickness of today.
The sex's tricks, he leaves the hall,
The snores of heavy Pustyakov,
The sound opinions he'd acquired.
The spirit of his judgements, prizing
The sudden tender look he'd given,
The very window-frames vibrated;
The whispers, laughs of stupid men '
Then I, perhaps - I'll be descending
The cock salutes the morning star,
The curtains of his bed he's parted;
Then  why not let a poet play
These doubts resolved, tomorrow they
They'd shared their leisure time, a meal
The bee flies from its waxen comb,
The beetle whirrs. The waters flow.
The carpet-covered bed, the books,
They fly as swiftly as a dart.
The ageing lady was delighted
The children ran off speedily
The cock has for the first time clicked.
The dales dry out and colour over.
The desk, the lamp there, now extinguished,
The dreadful treasure to its home.
The dread where vice and shame may lurk,
The erstwhile comrades slowly, steadily
The fire upon the altar's gone.
The foes cast off their cloaks, meanwhile
The mistress vanished from the place
The nurse might just have known of it,
The pistols glistened; soon the mallets
The ploughman rests beside their brink
Their ringing pitchers in the water;
There, by the brook, in deepest shade,
There are two hearts yet, I believe,
The earth is closed and no more heard?
There, too, a tombstone can be found
The fires of fishermen; and, dreaming
The former hold no expectations,
The hubbub, storms, festivity,
The inscription tells the passer-by:
The lancer, as his lot demanded,
The maiden's melancholy face.
The master's study, where he pleased
The monument's forgot by people.
The mother at her daughter's going
The nightingale that newly sings.
The nightingale, through night's long hours,
The noontide of my life is starting,
The objects that surround her here,
The plain inscription quickly, causing
The poet is no more perturbed,
The poet's dead  already, though,
The poet's memory has fled
The sadness and the pleasant torments,
The shepherd sings still as before,
The shot had gone right through him. How
The skies shine with a bluish sheen,
The slayer of her brother. Woe,
The slayer of the youthful poet?'
The sleigh is ready; Eugene, seated,
The springtime of my days has vanished,
The storm has blown, the finest flower
The sun climbs high into the azure,
The thirst for knowledge, thirst for work,
The trail to it is overgrown,
The wish to meet, though, was compelling,
They went. At some remove, meanwhile,
The two foes stand with lowered eye.
The valley's dark. The grove is still
The vernal wind that fans my face
The voice of lover, friend or knave
The windows shuttered, chalked and vacant,
The window over them that looks
The withered years of our estate,
The wreath upon the bough is gone.
The years of youth give way to caution,
They leave the lady safe and sound.
The books then called for her attention.
The coach has been inspected, mended,
The cooks prepare a lunch for all,
There are no inns. In some cold cabin
There hangs for show a highfalutin'
There were preserved on many pages
There were some books he'd not forsaken
These words to all her rural ties:
The final date is almost gone.
The hours race on and in her tussle
The moon behind the hill takes cover
The oaken boughs with flocks of snow;
The pilgrim makes her homeward climb.
The plethora of goods and baggage:
The road's monotonous delights:
The servants weep, farewell is hard:
The sorceress arrives again.
The three kibitkas teem with baggage,
The trace of banks and frozen river;
The trenchant mark of fingernails,
They're harnessed to the master carriage,
The usual three kibitkas manage
The venerable carriage, gliding,
They glimpse ahead the golden crosses
The church bells' early roundelay,
The cry they hear is the Princess's.
The darkness thinning by degrees,
The dreadful conflagration burst.
The girl's abstracted lethargy.
They stop - just by St Khariton
The other one - a little patience 
The princess Aunt Yelena's wearing
Their daughters put their arms round Tanya.
Their guileless conversation gathers,
Their hopes, their pranks, their reveries.
These graces of young Moscow now
The people are so pale and weary,
Their very slander's dull and dreary.
The tears and joys she will not share
They find her somewhat unexpected,
The archive boys in congregation
The arc of seats for brides-to-be
The badge of which two sisters prated,
The chill of tranquil pride that awed her,
The earth which by her is caressed,
The flicker, whirl of dancing feet,
The galleries with people brimming,
The left? But where? What is so special?'
The light attire of pretty women,
The moon shines in the airy blue.
The night has many starry clusters,
The poor folk, the secluded nook
Their waistcoats and impertinence,
The tapers' glare, the music's clangour,
They take her to their rooms, make friends,
They travelled seven days and nights.
The two old ladies weep, embrace
The worldly tumult and the jesting,
Then, to requite their indiscretion,
There, done! Enough! No more diversions!
The flickering of dress and speech,
They sweetly ask for her confession
The lyc&#233;e's gardens saw me grow,
The Muse began to visit me.
The Nereids unceasing chorus,
The noise of feasts and fierce discussions,
The noisy multitude admiring,
The only law I recognize,
The two aunts wink and in like manner
The waves profound, eternal choir
Then calmly gaining rank, repute
The Cleopatra of Neva,
The general impressed the hall.
The gentlemen were bowing lower,
Then suddenly this picture cleared
The guests who slowly try to reach
The hostess sees a lady nearing,
The ladies gathered closer to her;
The men, who, like dark picture frames,
The passing hours Onegin's counting,
The Prince looks at Onegin:  Ah!
The very maiden he once met
The world around us ceaselessly,
The young hostess, who waits untiring,
Then tell me why you're so begrudging,
Then to her husband turned, retiring.
There, on her own, he finds Tatiana,
There at the door a ball dictator,
They laugh together. Guests now enter
The codes of rank that cramp the soul!
The days my fate has counted off.
The foggy novel being debated,
The grand monde's conversation sparks;
The lies the journals told, the war,
Their humble journey to the end.
There is no coquetry in her -
There is no doubt, alas, that Eugene's
They freshen in the rain of passion,
The almanachs, reviews that ever
The distant reach of the domain
The dreams with all else unconnected,
There's one thing you should hear from me:
These were the secret legends, fictions
The final stage to which we're led,
The furrowed snow melts on the street:
The garden and the avenue,
The grave where my poor nurse is laid 
The hateful freedom I so prize.
The heart's dark story had collected,
The hour when fate brought us together
The letters, tears I've had from you.
The lively image, witty joke
The Princess an impassioned letter,
The shuttered rooms, where he had spent
The shy young girl that he'd forsaken,
The silence of his study brought him
The snow, and wife he found a bore
The sun disports; in dirty cinders
The tear stains, where? No trace, no trace,
The things that every poet covets:
The threats, the rumours, the predictions,
The trumpery of hateful days,
The very moment I remember
The winter like a marmot pent.
They've missed the fully fledged Onegin,
Thinking that liberty and peace
Thirst still replenishes the beakers
Thirty-two steps and then diverted
This and the roaring chasm thwart her;
This angel, this proud devil - well,
This Grandison was smart at cards,
This is the first time that we grace
This light existence, every dram!
This most unpleasant t&#234;te-&#224;-t&#234;te,
This muddled neophyte of mine.
This one lacked conscience, that one sense;
This pomp, Onegin, these excesses,
This sets the jealous poet cheering;
This stanza saw its publication
This was the art of tender passion,
This way, I'll lead you. Here, we enter
This weighty tome a passing trader
This woeful note than to this meeting
This wondrous look appears to mend her:
Those dreams extolling liberty,
Those two in uniform, official 
Though he might struggle, short of death,
Though I dipped into, formerly,
Though I'll return to him, unfailing,
Though not a palace, street or ball
Though part of it, he did not rue
Though slender work. With you I've known
Though what's Romantic here I simply
Thought only of Tatiana, not
Three shapely pairs of women's feet
Through cut-steel barrels went the bullets,
Through flowers to the brook she flies,
Through four-and-twenty hours you'll never
Through sleeping streets, past houses darkened
Through solid rows aristocratic,
Through spectacles old age divines
Throughout the evening my Onegin
Throughout, his soul was by such signs,
Thus, classicism I placate:
Thus an old soldier takes delight
Thus does the shadow of a storm
Thus, slowly, on a mountain-side
Thus Eugene preached. Tatiana, crying,
Thus I'm the first one to confess
Thus storms in autumn, cold and ruthless,
Thwarted desire tormenting him,
Tight-buttoned, mute and still as stone;
Till modish rings had been located.
Till twenty-six, and still his soul
Time to get up, past six, we're late,
Time was, he stood upon a pedestal,
Time was, on Sundays, by this casement,
Time was, she would have written in a
Time was, there hung a secret wreath,
Time was, two girls in evening leisure
Time was, when cool debauch was lauded
Time was, when virginally grieving
Time would have taught me to extinguish
To all my kinsfolk, finally
To all who gaze on them magnetic,
To animate a linen cloth.
To anybody or to dawdle
Today all this is antiquated,
Today such love's anomalous,
To bidding Eugene a farewell.
To bring him medicine, looking tearful,
To cheer up the imagination
To court their semi-Russian neighbour;
To dominate his every thought.
To down a Strasbourg pie and beef-steaks,
To down hot cutlets one by one,
To dream of objects dear to me;
Told in the darkness of the night,
To English spleen - the Russian version,
Together they arrived, and none
Together with you, now I weep;
To fame and freedom dedicated,
To far Moldavia's steppes, where he
To foreign parts with me, but fate
To frighten people was their mission.
To gossip of this kind; but she,
To grandsons of Apollo sacred,
To grieve in, chased by aching love,
To help the poor folk? Weren't you nearing
To her: in winter, tales of horror,
To hide a feeling or a thought
To him, forever persecuted
To his abrasive disputations,
To his penates now returning,
To hiss off Cleopatra, Phaedra,
To husbandly opinions, too;
To introduce a new regime.
To joke, to judge, not without spite
To keep a store of every fable,
To kiss with so much pain and hunger
To living in domestic bliss;
To mark the days we have in store.
To mark the patriarchal dust
To match a dream with tuneful phrase,
To murder every evening thus?'
Tomorrow just like yesterday.
To our dance as round we go.
To perfect aims - a paragon.
To play upon the spacious lawn,
To praise these proud ones with my lyre,
To prop up pillows by his head,
To punish my naivet&#233;.
To put our knowledge on display.
To put some new apparel on.
To puzzle out an epigraph,
To rack the heart, and when we tire,
To rain and flax and cattle-yard '
To raise its value when we own it,
To satisfy our whims abundant
To sighs of passion or to praise.
To sigh - while inwardly you think:
To skip or play, but often, rather,
To solve which he would rack his mind,
To speak of him; how tedious
To stormy errors and delusions
To tales of other people's passions,
To talk of Juvenal or set a
To tell it in an adult manner
To tend a sick man day and night
To the enchanting bow obedient,
To the old woman mournfully.
To the reviewers to devour;
To trap it more assuredly;
Toquato's octaves drawing near!
Tormented, too, by quick successes,
To play with an unravelled tress
To us have long since been old hat.
To wanton glory pay no heed.
To watch the dancing stars receding
Too dangerous for Olga's age,
To all its monstrous images.
Today, like ladies, understated,
Towards a corner seat he takes her,
To benefit us everywhere,
To be no ball of prejudice
To buy it, if he could include
To call to on the other side.
To catch the star while still in motion
To cornfields in a noisy cloud.
To die from him will be delightful.
To drain on credit two or three
Together with a spouse well nourished,
To fall into a swoon or faint;
To fight with either him or you,
To flee Onegin and his team;
To housemaids' quarters. All are needy
Took Olga and Tatiana then
To learn to live more sensibly,
To meet Eugene, who promptly ran off
To move a cover or a chair;
To paint a Petersburgian ball.
To pick it up, the bear is nigh,
To raise the cock and, taking aim,
To raise the dress around her flowing;
To read their work to a beloved
To seat a small dog on his sled,
To see among this company
To see that he's still loved; and longs
To sing of someone, God knows whom,
To sleep, poor thing, she could not yield
To talk to her of this or that;
To teach his kids their ABC.
To tease was once his recreation,
To this demand for satisfaction
To trumpet, dagger and the mask,
To understand him's quite beyond her:
To wash its snout - in this she saw
To wear the ties of marriage yet,
To what far desert will you wander,
To which Onegin in his glory
To whisper to it her desire.
To whom the monde awards a carrot,
To whom you pledged your heart's affection,
To whom, then?'asked the ancient dame.
Too late now, everything is settled,
To all her various relations.
To ask her whether he'll be pardoned,
Today, quite different, chilling dreams;
Towards that strange, deserted place.
To arm each glance and every phrase,
Today it is my turn to speak.
To bid their mistresses goodbye.
To burn - while reason every moment
To call his people. Straightaway,
To capture with enamoured eyes
To carry on her conversations
To cheat on us, each hour, each day,
To curious dreams was not addicted,
To daily dinners Tanya's taken
To dear Tatiana, triumphing,
To dreaming endlessly addicted,
Together let us take a rest,
Towers, pharmacies and stores with fashions,
To Eve, our ancestress: what's granted
To find a grave for one to lie in;
To find the keeper of the manor
To folly now you've paid your due.
To futile enterprise consigned.
To God knows where, without a trace.
To greet a hero so impatient.
To hear this sensible advice;
To Larina.'  Tatiana!'  Oh then,
To leave the fields' and woods' seclusion,
To listen to the sea's dull boom,
To listen to what people say,
To me alone in his sad dawn,
To meet his wife. The Princess looks
To Moscow, to the bridal fair!
To offer up the clarity
To open up the house and greet her.
Tomorrow, Tanya we shall show
Touches her hand hot-bloodedly
To do so, feigning reservation,
To each and all. So, now, hurrah!
To feed a dream, and cause a clamour
To follow you in all directions,
To Fontenelle, and when he'd read him,
To him I shall be true for life.
To his Tatiana, unforewarned.
To languish after your beloved,
To listen and to understand
To look at you with cheerful gaze
To melt in torments at your hand,
To plan a grave that lauds his name
To play  tomfoolery  with me.
To reach again her fields and lanes,
To see an aunt, who, with consumption
To see you as each minute flies,
To send him off to meet his kind.
To sigh for whom it is her lot,
To sleep, take coffee, pay attention
To smug nonentities that near it,
To somewhere far off, borne by fate,
To Spartan prose the years are turning,
To speak to her of yesterday;
To stretch out someone on the ground
To struggle further with my passion;
To take a breath of frosty air,
To tempt a maiden's innocence
To the Assembly, too, they bring her,
To the clavier he'd wander, playing
To them the door is opened wide,
To this offensive passion, to
To those first strophes that I wrote 
To view his image in a mirror
To visit her she grants him freedom,
To warm the heart, to entertain,
To warn his forebears to expect
To wash her face, her shoulders, breast.
To weep on my untimely urn,
To what the steward had to mention,
To where a secret tree is planted;
To where the young Vladimir lies,
To which he'd given mute consent.
To white-stone Moscow gallop, as
To wish to hold your knees, and, pouring
To wreak the other one's destruction 
To write a gravestone madrigal.
To write a poem and discuss
To yield to him old Kremlin's keys.
Transform the field into a slough,
Transparent still, the woods turn green,
Treading on toes at every stall,
Treat the occasion as a jest,
Triquet, a poet with a knack,
Triquet, in truly Gallic manner,
Triquet with ceremonial sign
True sadness put him on his mettle,
True tenderness in it she sees,
Truly: by means of magnetism
Tsimlyansky wine goes on display,
Turn to the elder sister now.
Twin carriage lamps pour out a jocund
Two hearts, a torch and tiny flowers;
Two-horned, upon her left, at once
Two-legged creatures in their millions
Two neighbours there have met to chatter
Two oaklings stand, and leave them there.
Two Petriads, a Russian grammar
Two weeks a matchmaker kept coming
Unable to appreciate it,
Under the silver moonlight streaming,
Under your lonely roof take cover,
Undressed and settled into bed,
Unfathomable to the mind;
Unmetered verses, by tradition,
Unruffled is the winter track.
Until Br&#233;guet with watchful chime
Until her cheeks desist from burning.
Until the grave invited down
Until the Muse gave them a language:
Unto the stringent monde's attention
Unwell, he writes with feeble hand
Up at the gate retainers vie
Up from a brimming dish of water
Up in the gods they clap, ebullient,
Upbraided him that way and this.
Uphill, relieved to be alive;
Upon an album's fleeting pages
Upon an alien public set,
Upon a bench, the ancient dame
Upon a bunch of buttercups;
Upon a goose's neck, rotating,
Upon a jade, unkempt, depleted.
Upon a pine branch, low inclining,
Upon a post-chaise Eugene sped,
Upon a shaky bench he lays her
Upon a soul long dead, does all
Upon a young soul craving sadness;
Upon blue blocks of hewn-out ice
Upon her balcony, preceding
Upon her fevered tongue lies drying
Upon her lips her breath has died,
Upon her shoulder; when a tread
Upon his beaver collar, petals
Upon his brow the hue of death,
Upon life's furrows; in its wake
Upon my conscience: do believe me,
Upon the first leaf you'll be meeting
Upon the modish word ideal;
Upon the parquet floors of halls,
Upon the sea's free crossway wending,
Upon the sleeping river, gliding,
Upon the stove would lift a paw
Upon which, let us part, farewell!
Up to this day our proud tongue shows
Us all with overwhelming rays
Verses and jokes in endless streams
Verse will acquire more useful features;
Vexation, jealousy were banished,
Vice in the novel, too, is lauded
Vice was forever beaten down
Visit again the empty home
Vladimir answered icily
Vladimir closes Schiller's verses,
Vladimir dozed, while lingering still
Vladimir Lensky doth here lie,
Vladimir Lensky visited
Vladimir said. Behind the mill
Vladimir straightway felt a call
Vladimir to delightful capture
Vladimir, under Olga's sway,
Vladimir, when his spirits flowed,
Voluptuously through the water
Waited  for somebody to call,
Waiting for him, he'll find Kaverin.
Wait, I'll present you, when they end.'
Wakes villagers to rise and rally.
Wandering in the morning calm.
Wanted the poet's sweet invention,
Warmed by the god of inspiration,
Was a delightful little spot;
Was born to play this very part.
Was broken by the screech of geese
Was certainly no Grandison.
Was eager to become his man,
Was even younger then than me,
Was far less meaningful to hear.
Was handsome, in his youthful prime,
Was he perturbed by vows reneged on,
Was hers the letter he'd preserved,
Was it for long she mourned her lover?
Was it in vain that, feasting, he
Was lit by virginal desire.
Was looked upon as marriageable;
Was Martin Zadek, Chaldee sage,
Was not contented with his role.
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
Was soon to part us and unravel
Wasn't it you, dear vision, beckoned
Wasn't it you that I was hearing
Was over now; the days rushed by;
Was swift enough. Discussion spared,
Was what his Olen'ka first said.
Waving its snapping vanes like lances;
We all are contradictory.
We all aspire to be Napoleons;
We both had known the play of passions,
We cannot boast of. Having fought
We drank, in mute intoxication,
We'd better hurry to the ball
We dedicated walks and tears,
Well, send your grandson very quietly -
Were boring to her equally.
Were destined to be father, spouse,
Were in a unique shape expressed,
Were not, of course, lit up with feeling,
Were picking berries in brigades
We'll fly now to the garden where
Wedlock would make you want to leave me.
Weighed down with heavy flocks of snow;
Well, yes; let's hope I'm entertained.'
Were celebrated as of old,
Were unreservedly malicious,
We promise those who hear us maids
We sometimes like to lend an ear
We've all learned through our education
We've simply utilized it for
Wet-nurses shout and children cry.
We countryfolk make little fuss
Were full of sleeping girls. Alone
Were on the dinner chairs located,
Were parted by a thirst to kill?
We glide across the lacquered boards;
We have automedons, quick-witted,
Wearing a quilted dressing gown;
Well then, he's dead, you understand,'
We'll leave my hero to his meeting
Well, never mind what it may be,
We'll part the mountains in the skies,
We might to foolish jokes respond,
We recollect a bitter fortune,
Wetting the steel bit, chafing, snorting,
We've had enough of all his show.
We've roamed around the world and back.
We were by old Derzhavin heeded
We won't tell fortunes all night through.
What all day long would occupy
What can I hope for in this life?'
What Eugene knew of in addition
What from his early adolescence
What more? Society opined:
What of it? It is pleasing, resonant;
What shameful cunning to be cheerful
What silly places all these are!
What snares he'd set to make him founder!
What talent for appearing novel,
Whatever Paris, in its hunger,
Whatever trinket-dealing London
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
What blissful feelings fill her breast,
What could Tatiana do but marvel
What did you dream, whom did you see?
What does his face show - spleen, hurt pride?
What else is there that I could say?
What followed on from the encounter?
What friends are these, if friends at all,
What fun! There is to be a ball!
What Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
What happens if your young companion
What in a family's more depressing
What is he then? An imitation,
What is the coming day's decision?
What is your name?' He looks; anon
What languid tumult, what upheaval
What matters is this letter here:
What move the other may be making,
What now enticed her like a siren
What pastime can you find that's pleasing
What people think in any case,
What! From the steppes, that outback region ?'
What confronts him then, what makes him shudder?
What do I want? To what end, after
What do they mean? Oh, I'd surrender
What frost surrounds her, how severe!
What is she dreaming of at present?
What rhyme now follows, if not  perished'?
What's happening? In what strange dream
What shoulders, bosom, soul!  Some time,
What silent sufferings were reflected
What's to be done? Once more I say
What then? By love intoxicated,
What then? Oh nothing. I'm just laying
What thought it was or observation
Whatever, reader, your opinion,
What was your answer? Only sternness.
What wicked merriment, what laughter
What will he stage for us meanwhile?
What will he think?' With torment flaming,
What wind is it that's blown him here?
What would you like, you've but to say 
What you were like then I don't care,
When argument became too serious,
When caught in a poetic haze,
When daybreak comes with rays ascending
When earth's fine edge is softly glowing,
When fathers or old uncles met,
When he arrived, the guests would labour
When in good earnest he fell ill,
When off he'd gallop, undeflected.
When passion's flame at last is smothered,
When shall I listen to your chorus,
When shall I start my freedom's flight?
When will the devil let him sink?
When, in the land itself they hold
When from the hall they hear the cadence
When I began this composition
When I want somebody to read to,
When in the stillness I'd depart
When skies at night are limpid, bright
When tearful poets have been suffered
When times were calm  to full extent;
When to the banner we've foregathered
Whenever, holding her in-quarto,
Whenever nurse, obeying Olga,
When we lure this fine young lad,
When we see him distantly,
When, in the morning, Eugene saw
When all came out to view the chaise
When at a gated house arriving,
When first I met you, I detected
When in the loud monde's pantomime,
When noisy comments start to plague you,
When shall I see you all?' she cries,
When suddenly, and with a quiver,
When talking of him. Might it be
When to your desperate appeal
When we are free of the constrictions
When we embarked on our narration,
When you with such intelligence
Where fashion's model pupil duly
Where he had long shed living tears,
Where, forty years, till his demise,
Where are you? Come: my rights I raze
Where do you spend your evenings?'  Why,
Where God knows whom she was to meet.
Where I '  An eclogue's bound to follow!
Where, halting, out of breath, she sighs
Where all her girlfriends will have entered
Where are my dreams, the dreams I cherished?
Where bird cherry, acacia climb;
Where did that gloomy oddball go,
Where is the noble aspiration
Where liberty's admirers are
Where now you crush the flowers of spring?
Where only Eugene in their desert
Whereas an ode's majestic sweep
Where, blessedly, no thoughts encumber,
Where, friends, we bathe together now.
Where silently the world reposes;
Where's your companion?' came the zealous
Where this dull man, pleased with his treasure
Where, in the backwoods, I recall
Where, too, is love's acclaimed impatience,
Where dwelt that child of inspiration
Where every day a bloodstained shade
Where flows a tiny, limpid brook,
Where he appeared in former days.
Where I beheld you first of all,
Where my Eugene, the very same,
Where now a cross and branches shade
Where Thalia is quietly napping,
Where the excitement, crush and heat,
Where to Terpsichore alone
Where you caroused in winter time;
Where, then, upon it with such speed
Where, where's the pity, perturbation?
Whether by cross, by succinct word,
Whether indeed he feels regret
Whether I'm pierced by an arrow
Whether tumultuous recollections
Whether you were in love at all?'
Which I must needs accept, I know;
Which landed folk are pleased to use!
Which spares the stomach and the head.
While dining in his dressing-gown;
While fairer in his preconceptions
While friends and friendships simply pained him,
While from beyond the gravestone's remit
While harmless, is nonsensical;
While he's forgotten in his hut.
While he was not yet quite eighteen.
While he, the conscientious clubber,
While household women, coachmen brawl.
While little grasping what he heard,
While restless Petersburg already
While rural Cyclopes take courage
While rural engineer Zaretsky
While the cotillion's endless stream
While they untwined my braid they wept,
While thinking that his head might split;
While to the gravestone it inclines
While underneath her pillow slotted
While we whom Hymen will not capture
While, interrupting them, good sense
While Morpheus was still in flight,
While you may find a dame among them,
Whispering gravely to each other:
Whispers by heart, unconsciously
Whist's gallant heroes have completed
Whist too, still one of players' staples -
Whitening on Tverskaya Street.
Whither, ah whither are you fled now,
Whither and wherefore do I strive?
Whom did your verses idolize?'
Who are you: guardian angel, mentor,
Who can there be who won't betray?
Who cooled his love with separation,
Who could have taught such tender writing,
Who don't deserve the passions or
Who dulls us like an opiate -
Whose gaze, exciting inspiration,
Whose hand, that favours my renown,
Whose honour is my pledge for ever.
Who is the man not bored by feigning,
Who saw no harm in books, which he,
Who taught her that affecting rot,
Who will not tire of the denials,
Who yawned with wife and company,
Whom for good reason I recall!
Who could at twelve yards hit an ace,
Who could detect Tatiana's plight,
Who'd dare to seek the tender creature
Who died a young man and courageous,
Who does not read right to the end
Who'll cosset us with care and candour?
Who'll judge a deed or disputation
Who'll look benignly on our vice?
Who'll never bore us with his sighs?
Who'll not bestrew our path with slander?
Who reads to her for whom he longs,
Who sets aside cold intellect,
Whoever loves you more than I,
Whom then to love? Whom to have faith in?
Whose Finnish Maid I can't outdo.
Whose head is steady, never stirred,
Whose heart, enjoying bliss delightful,
Whose heart experience has chilled,
Who hates each impulse, every word,
Whoever may be at the door.
Whole families have made their way
Who, with his heart and mind, had won
Whose urge to reverie is stilled.
Who knows, her love perhaps might then
Who solved your dreams on every page.
Whom thirty centuries enshrine.
Who'd waited there impatiently,
Who had with her the hallway key.
Who, step by step, remaining truthful,
Who is he? Well, it's my impression
Who is it could not have detected
Who? That fat general, you mean?'
Who, though more beautiful by far,
Who, thundering through in great display,
Whose wine-filled glass he has not drained,
Why blame Tatiana, then? For having
Why fight the age's predilection?
Why not?'  Were I like you a singer,
Why, Tanya, what is it?'  I'm cheerless,
Why ever did you visit us?
Why have you marked me for attention?
Why should a happy man suspect?
Why, Olen'ka is younger than her.'
Why is this person at our side?
Why you're pursuing me today.
Will be by your relentless gaze
Will generate a heartfelt flutter
Will heed the journals, set up school
Will make us feel at liberty?'
Will merit a regard benign,
Will not appeal to you, I fear,
Will not in Lethe drown, forsaken,
Will no more look like tawdry byways,
Will occupy my blithe decline.
Will pat the old man's laurel crown!
Will point to my illustrious portrait
Will unify the Russian land,
Will visit friends for some distraction;
Will you then not forgive her, when
Wine in the gleaming glass still fizzes
Winter, as warming air blew through it,
Winter that year arrived belated,
Winter!  The peasant, celebrating,
With all the finery and faces
With an obedient tear it shone.
With a congenial soul, that she
With all its glitter, noise and smoke
With all my soul your perfect nature,
With a request, immodestly:
With a sweet fancy he would cradle
With anyone encountered there.
With butting horns descending low
With candid honour, side by side.
With carefree charm, our lady sat,
With censure, which alas I merit!
With cheek on hand  Ah, what regrets,
With classic features, smooth like marble,
With curious gaze Tatiana ponders
With darkening eyes; a glow pervades her,
With dazzling, multi-coloured flowers;
With difficulty write a word.
With dinner, supper, tea my measure.
With disapproval looked thereon:
With dishes, as their rank deserved.
With dreams and heart of former years.
With dreams of some far distant clime,
With ease you'll see the winter through.
With errors and distasteful rhymes,
With every meadow, grove in sight,
With exclamations and good cheer.
With feelings joyful and half-anguished:
With fiery sighs and compliments;
With first-rate wit and subtle play,
With gloomy forehead and a hat.
With hair trimmed to the latest fashion,
With having read her Richardson,
With her, Onegin - and when I
With her extended family,
With him Onegin.  Lord, at last!'
With his depraved, immoral soul,
With his embittered, seething mind
With his sartorial repertory;
With hope, then introduce confusion
With housekeeper the old man battled,
With inexplicable elation,
With inspiration new I'll enter
With its abundant feelings that
With jealous apprehension quaking,
With journals and their clientele,
With just two balls till close of day.
With kerchiefed head, her feeble frame
With lampions around it scattered,
With Lensky's timid, tender passion;
With loftiness and exhortation,
With lofty rooms throughout the dwelling
With love and using all his art;
With maidens' fainting fits and tears
With melting gaze Tatiana measures
With merry jokes and braggartry.
With neck-cloth overstarched, produced
With neighbour Lensky, now deceased.
With neighbours from estates surrounding;
With passion and intelligence,
Withdrew their friendship straightaway.
Within my breast as formerly.
With Nina Voronskoy, at table,
With Olga to the ball again.
With orthographic imprecision,
With pen and wash she might admire;
With pictures of a happy love,
With Pomeranian dog and spouse.
Withered at last, is this the truth?
Within this land of sterile views,
With one sensation in his mind;
With ringing music. There awaited
With Russian pancakes or bliny;
With salutations done, Zaretsky
With secret tales and magic aura!
With sharpening contrition growing,
With shouts and calls, the guests clap hard,
With sighs, the ashes of the dead;
With silken patterns she was loath
With solemn mien Onegin heeded
With someone who is halfway dead,
With songs, I fear, that won't delight her -
With such a name, so out of place.
With such impassioned innocence,
With sudden clip-clop from afar,
With sudden light. She brought me there
With tears my mother begged, entreated
With tears of bitter sorrow flowing,
With tenderness, with not a care,
With their innumerable offspring
With The Well-Meaner at their side!
With them the watchful girl engages
With thundering, whirring, churning waves;
With tragi-nervous demonstrations,
With trivial ladies, vulgar men,
With turbulent imagination,
Without a backward look she scurries
Without a doubt you'll understand.
Without allegiances, I vanished,
Without a word observe Tatiana,
Without Br&#233;guet to govern us:
Without grammatical mistakes.
Without his knowing it, expounded,
Without it there's no paradise.
Without preamble or delay:
Without rejecting anyone -
Without replying, hung his head.
Without surprise or wrath  His fading
With weary look she glided hence 
With what alacrity accepting
With what a heavy, tender feeling
With what celestial pride she graces
With what enlivened fascination
With which begin? It matters not:
With young Semyonova; there our
With youth betrayed, its time for me
With you my destiny I'd seal
With you today like a companion.
Witness of glory's first defeat,
Wondering if he'll come to find her;
Won't let a traveller sleep a jot.
Won't stoop to kiss the hands of ladies;
Won't take his eyes off her at all.
Would at a window silently
Would come to mourn this doleful treasure,
Would fail to touch my heart and would
Would feed the flames of tittle-tattle
Would have become a faithful wife
Would Hymen pluck, how many more
Would in a future time emblazon
Would never think to smile at you;
Would not repeat a hundred times,
Would pine, whenever he departed,
Would she attract a person's gaze.
Wrenches away her golden earrings;
Yawning, he reached out for a pen,
Yearned to assay the fatal food;
Yet, after all, I am a poet:
Yet cursing fate in equal measure,
Yet here was found the city's flower:
Yet I in futile dullness squander
Yet in the chilly winter season
Yet one more thing drove us asunder 
Yet she can't sleep, when she reposes,
Yet they are yours through thick and thin,
Yet using such a sweet inflection
Yet were my morals not affected,
You'd be unlikely to discover
You lived in luxury, refinement.
You'll find her portrait there - it's sweet,
You loved the sumptuous feel instead
You were the first ones he forswore,
You yawn, Onegin, what's the matter?'
Your fate already you've relinquished
You'll perish, dear; but till we lose you
You'll see your fateful tempter there.
You'll summon up a sombre bliss,
Your pensive song and adoration?
Your place without replacing you?
You are not well.'  My heart is throbbing.'
You are unwell,' her nurse persisted.
You came in dreams that soon abounded,
You're all aflame'   I'm not unwell:
Your face is now all poppy red.'
Your faithful mistress has defected
You know, I make no sense at all.
You'll fall in love again, I know,
You'll find here, doubtless, on some pages
You mean an ode for each occasion?
You're bound to read here all the pledges
You're right and you will surely steer us
You treat our world with condescension,
You've guessed the rhyme to come is  petals',
You waste your energy in vain:
Your heart, Yazykov, finds the room
You will agree with me, my reader,
You won't abandon me, I'm sure.
Your openness appeals to me;
You are invited there next week.'
Your rights are honoured in the end.
You drop in twice, then disappear
You're kind,' Vladimir said and drained
You've no good reason to gainsay?'
You won't find much refinement here.
You wrote, in secret, verse and songs,
You wrote to me, do not deny it.
Your tears, pen, rhymes, etcetera.
You, too, he left in equal measure.
Your whimpering and endless croaking
You, who with joy and love persuaded
Young ladies heard their fortunes told
Your coaches, ponderously trundling;
You, dreams with sacred verses rife!
You, fortune's favourites, I entreat you, You,
You will reflect: he loved me, sworn
You, ladies blessed with gentle manners,
You, phantoms of unearthly life,
Your second, then?' Zaretsky cried.
Your soul, when without motion lying
You, too, my reader, ever gracious,
Young poet, rest and slumber here.'
Your chilling glance, that sermon  I'm
You hear the serpent's endless call
You know him, then?'  Well, yes and no.'
You peaceful places, hill and dell!
You're married.'  Oh, you did not know then?'
You rural Priams in your manors,
You've been away a long time - very,
You've guessed, you're right: my unreformed
You with my secret, sad confession,
You won't endure it you'll agree,
Your smiling lips, your eyes' reflections,
You'd never, would you, take in earnest
Your cold, unsparing homily,
Your heart is honest and I prize it:
You showed at least a noble temper
You showed my childish dreams compassion,
Your sharp reproach, unfriendly manner,
You at my feet in coward fashion?
Your wondrous glances pierced me through,
Yuletide is come with jubilation;
Zaretsky bit his lip, appalled.
Zaretsky gently on the sleigh
Zaretsky measured off in style
Zaretsky, once a brawler and
Zaretsky rose without explaining,
Zaretsky solemnly is sealing
